Does objective morality exist?
NO. But, . . . that might not mean what you think it means.
Thousands of top-notch minds have written on this topic over the centuries. Some progress has been made in understanding the issue, but moral theorists remain deeply divided.
Moral Realists will accuse Moral Anti-Realists and Non-Cognitivists of failing to take morality seriously. And Realists are in turn accused of not taking science seriously.
I think these are red-herrings. Realists and non-Realists alike are all interested in supporting a robust moral practice, are often allied on particular moral issues.
And both camps are typically respectful of scientific practice and scientific epistemological norms as well. 
The controversy is not about which things are right and which things are wrong. It is about how we think about our moral practice, and what we think grounds it.
Often in Philosophical debates controversy will persist because we use key terms in different ways.  I suspect very much that that is part of what's going on in this debate.
For instance, I think there are at least two main ways for a claim to be "subjective". And just because a claim is subjective in one way, that doesn't mean it has to be subjective in the other way.
I'll get to that in just a few seconds (depending on how fast you read, of course :)).
I want to reiterate: this issue is thorny, and it's difficult to address adequately in even a few thousand words.
That said, I will attempt an answer here that's short enough to get one's mind around in one sitting, yet thoughtful enough to convey some of the complexity of the issue. 
A thousand questions will remain unaddressed, and we can discuss some of those in the comments.
Are there moral facts?
Take a claim that is considered objective by most people: 
“Gravity causes objects to fall near earth’s surface.”
Take another claim that is considered merely subjective by most people: 
“Ice cream is yummy.”
Now take a moral claim: “Genocide is wrong.”
Is this claim about genocide subjective or objective?  Is it more like claims about gravity? Or is it more like claims about ice cream?
I’ve summarized my position in the following chart. I'll present the chart first, and then I'll explain and defend my choices.
A claim is empirically testable if there is, in principle, a way to set up an experiment that will allow us to confirm or disconfirm the claim based on evidence that comes from our experiment.
A claim is universally valid if it holds for all people everywhere, regardless of what they think about the matter.
Scientific claims are capable of being both empirically testable and universally valid.
Aesthetic preference claims are neither empirically testable nor universally valid. (Note: do not confuse an aesthetic preference claim -- "Ice cream is yummy" -- with a report about an aesthetic preference -- "John thinks ice cream is yummy." The first is an aesthetic preference claim. The second is an empirical claim.)
Moral Claims (I propose) are like aesthetic preference claims in that they lack empirical testability, but they are like scientific claims in that they can have universal validity. 
Moral Claims Lack Empirical Testability
Let’s see what it means to say that moral claims are not empirically testable.
Suppose someone is about to touch a hot stove. And we say, “Stop. If you touch that stove you’ll burn yourself.”
And they say, “For you the stove is hot and will burn you. For me it won’t”.
What then? 
Easy. We just sit back, wait for them to burn themselves, and say “I told you so”. We don't actually HAVE TO do anything. The world itself can confirm the truth of our claim.
But suppose we are in a conversation with Hitler, and we say: “Genocide is wrong”.
He replies: “You dislike genocide. I like it. It’s wrong for you, but not wrong for me.”
We say: “No, it’s wrong for you as well.”
What then? Can we sit back and expect the "wrongness of genocide" to manifest itself to him in some way? Can we say:
“Go ahead Hitler, commit genocide. You’ll see. When you burn yourself, we’ll say we told you so. When the wrongness of genocide performs its effects in the world, you’ll see that we were right all along.”
Of course we wouldn't actually take that approach, because allowing him to “learn the hard way” would cost lives. 
But, more importantly for the purpose of this discussion, that approach simply wouldn't work anyway.
The world does not give feedback about things like the wrongness of genocide. The "wrongness of genocide" is not an empirical matter.
The “wrongness of genocide” will not produce any effects in the world on its own.  In order for the wrongness of genocide to have any effects in the world, we need people (subjects) who have certain attitudes toward that "fact". 
It is we who impose the "wrongness of genocide" on the social order.
Because moral "facts" cannot have any effect in the world, unless "subjects" embrace them, they are "subjective" in this sense.
Let's call people who think of moral "facts" in this way "Moral Subjectivists".
Moral Subjectivists also typically believe that moral claims are "invented" by subjects who have certain goals and desires.
And, setting aside religious views for now, it seems tough to argue against this position. If you take the scientific view of the cosmos seriously, where else would moral opinions come from? Don't they have to arise from the goals, desires, and reasoning of the creatures who are involved in moral dialogue with each other?
Now let's say we accept Moral Subjectivism.  Does that also mean we have to be Moral Relativists?
No.
Moral Claims Can Have Universal Validity
Just because putative moral facts lack empirical objectivity, that does not mean they must also lack universal validity.
Just because they depend on subjective acceptance for their existence and their efficacy, that does NOT mean they depend on subjective acceptance for their validity. 
In other words, we can still apply our moral rules to other people, even when they don't accept those rules. Nothing prevents us physically from saying:
“Genocide is wrong, not only for me, but for everyone, no matter what anyone else thinks about it”.
We can go further. We can say that we think it makes sense to feel guilty for committing genocide, or even seriously contemplating it. We can say that it makes sense for us to be outraged when we hear about genocide. We can say that we plan to band together with others who wish to prevent genocide. And we can hope that we might even be willing to risk harm to ourselves to prevent it if necessary.
To go further in these ways is to insist that our moral claims have more than parochial validity. It is to say that we think everyone should accept these norms no matter who they are or when they live.
Insisting on the universal validity of our most deeply held moral values is necessary if we are to oppose female genital mutilation in cultures that have that practice – even though some people in those cultures don’t share our attitudes. It’s also what allows us to say that slavery was wrong even long ago, even when some people in those cultures endorsed it.
Ah, but a question begs to be asked at this point . . .
If There Are No Objective Moral Facts, How Can We Justify Our Universal Moral Claims?
OK, so we can insist that our moral claim applies to others, even if they don't think so. But how can we justify this attitude?
Well, we can justify it the same way we justify anything.
We either have to give reasons we think will appeal to our audience, or we have to just insist that we are right, even though we can't explain why in terms they will accept. (We can also re-think our position, but that will depend to some degree on how reasonable we take the other person to be when they reject our reasons).
Suppose we are confronting someone who is intent on committing genocide.  We claim: "Stop. Genocide is wrong!"
He looks puzzled and says: “Why ever would you say a thing like that?”
We must now consider how to justify our claim that genocide is wrong. And we might try something like: 
“Well genocide harms others, and harming others is bad. Also, doing harm to others based solely on which group they belong to, when they've done you no harm, is barbaric.”
But what if these reasons leave them cold? 
Fortunately that's very rare among humans, but it's possible.  And at that point we would be left with little choice. We would have to say something like: 
“OK, I guess there’s nothing I can do to persuade you that genocide is wrong.  I think you're woefully wrong, and I will do all that's in my power to prevent you from doing what you plan on doing. I guess I'm just the kind of person who doesn't want to live in a world that permits genocide."
If that sounds less than fully satisfactory, then consider that we really have no choice.
The justification would not go much differently if we assume there are objective moral facts out there in the universe. And it would not go much differently even if there were moral facts out there in the universe -- given that they are causally inert.
We would start the same way, trying to appeal to reasons and principles we think they might accept.
And then, when we saw that they were unmoved by our justifying considerations, we would have to say something like:
“Well, it’s just a fact. Genocide is wrong. That’s a fact. Harming others for no reason is wrong. That’s a fact. If you're too blind to see that, then I guess I am left with nothing to do but oppose you.”
In either case, whether we think there are objective moral facts or not, once we exhaust our attempts to justify our claim in terms the other person will accept, we are reduced to saying some version of “well I just think you’re wrong”. And this, too, will almost certainly leave them unmoved – either because they don’t share our subjective attitudes (as a subjectivist might explain it), or because their conscience is broken and they just don’t see the moral facts we can see (as an objectivist might explain it).
Unfortunately, this disagreement about genocide is not like the stove touching case. The universe will not help us out here. There's no sitting back, letting them burn themselves, and saying "I told you so."
Whether we are subjectivists or objectivists, all we can do is try to give justifications that will resonate with them (contextual justifications). And, if that fails, and the issue is important enough, we must simply insist that we are right and they are wrong (basically browbeating them).
Moral practice seems to work the same way either way. So does it matter whether we're Moral Realists, or Ethical Subjectivists?  
Perhaps. Consider, ...
Some Pros and Cons of Moral Subjectivism
If our moral claims are fundamentally subjective, are we better off facing that fact?  Or should we continue treating them as if they are as objective as scientific facts?
Some might claim that we will take our moral obligations more seriously if we think God or Mother Nature backs up these claims.
If we view our moral principles as springing from our subjective preferences, then they seem more ephemeral. And it seems that we would feel more free to set them aside when we can gain an advantage by doing so.
I don't know whether this fear is well grounded or not. It's an empirical matter.  It might well be that some people will behave better if they think God or Mother Nature demands that they act according to specific moral principles.
In that case, perhaps we are better off lying to those people.
But it might be that Moral Realism is to be feared as much as or more than Moral Subjectivism. 
Suppose our moral views arise solely from some combination of our subjective preferences, and our concern to justify our actions to others.  Then if we encourage people, contrary to these facts, to view their moral principles as being backed by God or Mother Nature, then we enable them to be more forceful and obnoxious about their preferences than we might wish them to be.
Perhaps it's better to encourage each other to own our subjective preferences for what they are.
If slave owners had to own their preferences for personal gain, and could not evoke the "will of God" or the "dictates of the Natural Order",  the institution of slavery might not have survived nearly as long as it did. But when they felt free to claim that God instituted slavery, or that it is the Natural Order of things, they were able to maintain moral momentum in the face of a million reasons to stop their practice.
I wonder whether an institution like slavery would persist as long in a human society composed mostly of humans who embrace Moral Subjectivism. 
It seems to me that, without mental constructs that enable extreme moral over-reach, our natural tendency to object when mistreated, combined with our natural desire to justify our actions to others, would cause us to converge on norms that would overturn the institution within a generation or two.
Many people note a march of moral progress over the last few centuries in the industrialized world. We have rid ourselves of slavery, and have given the vote to all adult citizens. We take animal welfare more seriously than ever. And so on. Much still needs improving, but it does seem that we are relentlessly making progress in the right direction.
Some might say this is evidence that there are moral facts, and that we are converging on those facts because we have mysterious faculties (our consciences) that can apprehend these facts, even though such "facts" are causally inert.
But it's just as plausible that we are converging on these views because we are naturally concerned to justify our actions to others.  (See: Jim Stone's answer to Why do humans have a conscience?) And when we set aside the heavy-handed sources of moral authority that have tended to support institutional power, we are left in our process of justification with little to consider beyond the heartfelt objections of fellow human beings who are being mistreated.
Closing Thoughts
Again there are many relevant considerations I haven't addressed here. This is a complicated issue, involving the way we use some very abstract words. And it's a highly charged issue, which can slow down the pace at which we can think about these matters.
Let me just close with the main reason I embrace Ethical Subjectivism:
Ethical Subjectivism reminds us that, if we want to create a better world, Mother Nature won't help us.  She doesn't care. We have to care.  We must share our vision of a better world with other human beings. We must work to persuade each other. We must gather like-minded people around us. And, if necessary, we must prepare to do battle with those who oppose our vision of the good.
I even prefer to express my moral views differently these days.
Instead of saying "Genocide is wrong", it seems just as good to say "Let's not tolerate genocide."
Instead of saying "We have an objective right to a free education", it seems just as good, if not better, to say, "Hey, since our society is now wealthy and organized enough, LET'S CREATE a right to a free education."
Basically, Ethical Subjectivism reminds us that, if we want to work for a better world, we have to stand on our own two feet, and stop hiding behind Mother Nature's pant legs.

I read the other answers and there is something that hasn't been said. What is the foundation of morality? Morality always follows a purpose. If you don't want anything, then there is no good or bad.
Lewis Caroll put it very well in his famous book when Alice asks the Chesire cat for help because she is lost in the woods (Disney movie script):
 I only wanted to ask you which way I ought to go
 Well, that depends on where do you want to get to
 Well, it really doesn't matter...
 Then it really doesn't matter, which way you go.
When you have a purpose, goods are the objects, situations or decisions that lead you to achieve that purpose. And the things that avoid you from achieving it, become bad. Try to make a mental exercise. All you value as good or bad is following a personal, social or instinctive purpose. Examples are having comfort, security, a stable society, food and most of them are related to keeping the life going, not only yours, since life is never alone.
As in every game, when two people share purposes, they share moral values. That is precisely why society happens at all. People realize they could help each other in a win-win situation when they worked together, and achieve things that alone would never be able to. Honesty and communications are clearly necessary for this to happen.
Most people say, for religious or secular reasons, that we all have a common purpose, like staying alive, and therefore the morals come straight away equal for every one. That is not true. Even when our nature pushes us all in the same instincts, we are free sentient beings, whose most intrinsic right is to decide what to do and what to love.
Therefore, there is no single moral value that can be imposed on everyone. Still, if you don’t share the purposes of a society, there is no point for you to live within it, and therefore such kind of people are rejected in exile, or in death when nowhere else to go.
At this point, it would be really interesting to introduce another concept: Obligation. Nobody es ever literally obliged to take any decision, what pushes you to take one decision or another is living in a society and accepting the purposes that sustain that society standing. Most of times, societies have ways to determine the behaviour of their members even when the members have never thought about the needs of the society. That is why most of the people don't understand why they have to do certain things until they grow up. Some never know, they are just sheep that are given purposes and rules.
Another very interesting question is where purposes come from, and if they are random or fixed to experience or what.  The topic of consciousness arises tall and sharp. A faint idea that comes to my mind is the "staying alive" as the song says, and more than that "staying" because not everything is alive.
Hope this helps :) Please comment, I would like to be criticized!

Imagine a society where there is no presumption of honesty, where telling the truth wasn't expected. Communication would quickly break down, because we would have no reason to believe anything anyone told us. If I asked what time it was, if there was no presumption of honesty, I would have no reason to believe you when you answered. In fact, since I have no reason to believe you, I wouldn't even ask in the first place. Trust, relationships, education, society in general would be impossible. Thus, honesty is objectively good and moral and necessary on its own.
Imagine a society where there was no prohibition against murder or violence; if you could kill someone, there would be no repercussions. People would quickly surround themselves with people who agree not to harm each other as a form of self defence, thus creating a smaller society where a prohibition against murder or violence does exist. A prohibition against murder and violence is objectively good and moral, necessary for both survival and society.
Morality is part self interest, part empathy.
Self interest: I don't want you to hurt me, and you don't want me to hurt you, so we agree not to hurt each other.
Empathy: If I were you, I would not want to be harmed. Therefore, I should not harm you.
There’s a simple way to answer this question.
Definition of ‘objective’: Neutral (bias free), relating to, or based on verifiable evidence or facts instead of on attitude, belief, or opinion.
Definition of ‘morality’: Conformance to a recognized code, doctrine, or system of rules of what is right or wrong and to behave accordingly.
Now that we have the definitions, let’s substitute them for the words themselves:
Can ‘morality’ be ‘objective’? = Can a system, code, or doctrine of rules that is recognized be neutral, free from attitudes, beliefs, or opinions, and verified empirically?
The answer is no.
Morality, by its very definition, is derived from an outside, subjective force that has seen fit to codify behavior into ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ columns for a reason.
Whether that reason is religious, political, logical, ethical, or economical is besides the point as they all have infusions of attitudes, beliefs, or opinions within them.
Morality cannot be empirically proven as being objective yet there are a select group who do attempt to do so: moral absolutists.
The absolutists hold that morality has absolute standards against which moral questions can be judged, and that certain actions are either good or evil, regardless of the context of the act. They attempt to prove that morals have a universal hold that cross all barriers and therefore can represent an ‘objective’ standard with which to answer moral questions.
The problem is that this cannot be proven empirically.
Example: The Sun is the center of the Solar System. Empirically provable. Fact.
Murder is wrong. Cannot be empirically proven. Opinion.
A fact is objective, an opinion is subjective.
Morality is essentially codified opinion, it cannot possibly be objective in any circumstance.

With decline in religious belief some people think there are no grounds for moral action other than mere whim. I strongly disagree. A person’s acts will be judged good or bad by their consequences and, if that person wishes the world to be a better place to live in, he will be duty bound to make sure they have good consequences. Any act which satisfies our appetites and achieves our goals makes us happier and is therefore good for us. To expand on that whatever goes some way toward satisfying our appetites and solving our problems, and thereby reducing the amount of conscious mental activity in the normally alert and aware human mind, amplifies the happiness in that mind because that is what happiness is. Such an event is described conventionally as "good".
However, the question now arises whether or not a “good” act is always a “moral” one. “Good” relates to the individual while “moral” relates to the group of which that individual is a member. (That group is ultimately the human race.) We have been used to thinking about moral concepts as edicts handed down from a superpower which we must blindly obey, when in fact they will turn out to have always been derived pragmatically, for our collective benefit. If we obey generalised, moral rules we will feel happier because such rules have been derived with that outcome in mind.
What sets the scene for our discussion is the observation that people who are members of a fully inter-dependent, co-operating group of specialists fare far better in terms of getting their appetites satisfied than individuals acting alone. Imagine having to sow, tend and reap your own crops, herd your own stock animals, make your own clay bricks and build your own house with them, quarry the slates for your roof, not to mention being obliged to design and build your own computer; the list is endless. You would be a jack of- all- trades, master of none. Your life would be one long round of back-breaking drudgery from dawn to dusk - and that just to stay alive.
However, being heir to the incalculable advantages of membership of a co-operating, specialising, interdependent group ensures that our lives are not like that. It is for this reason that no effort must be spared and no duty shirked in supporting and sustaining the group.
Some groups fare better than others depending in part upon the quality of the contributions of individual members. While analysing the activity of group members in order to discover the best ways of collectively satisfying their appetites, the concept of an ideal group member has evolved quite naturally.
The ideal member’s attributes have been defined to become the criteria by which other potential or existing members are measured, urged to conform to and perhaps even selected by. For a group to work well it has been discovered long ago that the ideal group member must not lie, cheat or steal etc. He will be punctual, resourceful and reliable etc. His word will be his bond. The most efficient group members have been found to be mutually trustworthy, each able to rely absolutely on the other's dependability in performing the specialised tasks allotted to them to the best of their ability.
In the ideal group (which is the most efficient group), bonds of mutual trust and respect will arise. What each man earns will be guaranteed by all. What each owns will be safeguarded by all. An unwritten contract will have been established which guarantees each participating group member a fair share of the results of his efforts and a fair allocation of the resources of the group, otherwise the incentive to act together would be weakened and ultimately vanish altogether.
Over many millennia, and probably through bitter experience, examples of fairly safe generalities defining attributes beneficial to group performance have been derived pragmatically and designated as virtues. In this manner virtues, morals and ultimately a system of enforceable law have been developed. Each situation has been analysed to find the best way to act in order to maximise the happiness of individuals in the group. This is why monogamy has been found to be good for one society, while polygamy is found better for another. What produces most happiness in one set of circumstances has been found not to be suitable in another set. However, there are few exceptions to rules like, “do not lie, steal or murder.”
Individuals will gladly shoulder duties and responsibilities in order to conserve the priceless advantage conferred by group membership. Such an unquestionable advantage in the satisfaction of appetite will give moral (group) considerations absolute precedence over the merely good (individual) ones.
Saying that, raises the question of whether the word “good” has any separate meaning at all. Surely it is true to say that all acts must be moral ones because one can rarely behave in a way that his actions effect himself alone. Most actions are social actions.
Such is the enormous value of group membership that in every case, the interest or survival of the group will take precedence over the interest or survival of the individual group member. For it is an incontrovertible fact that by contributing to the specialised, co-operating, interdependent group, the individual can so much more easily achieve his own personal goals and be much happier
Considering the social constraints imposed upon us by being moral to be merely a personal whim with no logical support will ensure that the necessary cohesion of our society dissolves - little by little. Moral precepts are common-sense rules which will, if adhered to, reinforce the bonds of the group and maximise everyone’s chance of happiness.
The best actions are moral ones.
When members of a group forsake virtuous action, the performance of that group will deteriorate until eventually there will be no advantage to be gained from being part of it. Then group members would have to be motivated by fear to carry out their duties. In that sort of nightmare society, such a turn of events would provoke social unrest, then riots and ultimately revolution.

It appears to be so. Good reasoning would either lead to moral nihilism, or moral realism. "Any argument from moral skepticism will be based on premises which are less obvious than the existence of objective moral values themselves." - Louise Anthony. It seems to be as real as the objectivity of the physical world. What appears to be different among us is how we act on moral values, not necessarily which values we have. For example, a cannibalist tribe in the West Indies would kill and eat people of other tribes or even other innocent people, but they would never eat people of their own tribe. So in a crazy sense they are loving their neighbors. Things like love, self-sacrifice, honor, and respect are seen as objectively right. And things like intolerance, greed, etc. are seen as objectively wrong.
So the real question is: Where does it come from? From a naturalistic perspective, morality is simply the byproduct of sociocultural evolution. If we rewind the evolutionary clock, we most likely would have had a different set of "objective" moral values. For instance, one could say that humans used to rape, and it became socially disadvantageous over time, thus becoming taboo. But that does absolutely nothing to say whether rape is wrong or right. All you could say is that one is acting unfashionably. So killing someone would be like burping at the dinner table in Western culture. Choosing to be a Hitler or a Mother Teresa would be like choosing between McDonald's and Burger King. Moreover, what makes us right and other species wrong? Killing goes on all the time in the animal kingdom. But the lion doesn't murder the gazelle. Sharks forcibly copulate with other sharks, but they don't rape other sharks. So what makes us right and them wrong? Are we presupposing that we are morally superior to other species? Sounds like "specieism". I mean, we are animals, aren't we?
If there is objective morality, it's best explained by a transcendent foundation. I would say that that foundation is God. He is the "moral lawgiver" who creates as moral agents with intrinsic worth, so we can be able to discern right and wrong and apprehend the realm of objective morality that imposes itself on us. His divine command would give us moral duties and obligations. And this would be if God exists. If He doesn't, objective morality doesn't. And moral nihilism would be the most reasonable.

No. Morality is, by definition, subjective. There are no morals about how you treat rocks or mountains.
There are morals about how you act towards other living entities that can fight back. Morals are about your communities - communities of friends, of neutrals, and of enemies. Moralities come from your communities, are monitored and enforced if necessary, by your communities or by members of your communities.
Let's take a simple conceptual example. Adam, alone in the garden of Eden. What immoral acts could Adam commit?
Which of the commandments could he break? Not one. When God introduced themselves, there was a basic community of two, and now the first two commandments can be broken. The rest cannot be broken until the community of humans grows larger.
Which of the seven deadly sins, are pride, greed, lust, envy, gluttony, wrath and sloth. Which can Adam sin before the people exist? Pride? Over whom?. Lust? For whom? Envy? Of whom? Gluttony? Possibly, but there is no one to judge. Wrath? Towards whom? And sloth? Who would notice? Can we define gluttony or sloth without an external observer? No.
Without community, morals do not exist. With community, they emerge naturally, because they create success.
A single living cell has no community, no need for morals. As soon as it reproduces, there are two cells. One could eat the other, but then there would only be one. Cells that don't eat their own kind are more successful. They reproduce more successfully, and eat the cells that have no morals. Cells that have better morals, to cooperate with like cells, will have more success. Cells that cooperate with unlike cells - more opportunities for success. More success means more progeny, passing those traits on, eating cells that are less successful. Individuals can deviate, but the community has more success with a blend of individual, selfish actions and moral cooperative actions.
Successful cellular communities form tissues. But the same rules apply at this layer. Tissues with morals, tissues that cooperate, enable more successes. Individuals are looking out for number one - an immoral strategy. But that strategy fails against communities of tissues that cooperate.
The layers continue. At each layer, from cells to tissues, to limbs and organs, organ systems, body, mind and spirit - cooperation, morals are required to rise to the next level.
Animals form families, and teach them morals. But for a family of animals to evolve requires basic morals to be part of their nature, not taught. It's simply more efficient.
Humans live in many communities. Each human lives in many moral - cooperative- communities throughout their lives. We can create communities. We can article morals and enforce them through our communities. Different communities have different morals. Many of us live our lives in multiple communities, some of which have opposing morals. We have evolved the ability to navigate this reality. We, each of us, are still self centered individuals, but we are more successful when we look after our children first, when we respect our elders, and even our enemies.

According to Kant, morality comes from reason. Every rational being (in theory not just humans, but every being capable of reason) is subjected to the same moral principles because morality is a dictate of reason. In short, one should only do things that are necessary; that don't entail a contradiction. In his words:
Act only according to that maxim whereby you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law without contradiction
A simple example is don't make false promises, because that is a contradiction to the concept of promises. If everybody did this, promises would become meaningless. This is known as first formulation of the categorical imperative. An imperative is something that tells us how to act. And it is categorical as opposed to hypothetical. Hypothetical imperatives only tell you how to to act in order to achieve some end; they're not universal. Categorical imperatives tell you how you should always act regardless of what you desire, just because it's your duty.
Maybe someone more well-versed on the subject will add an answer as I haven't even finished reading the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, but in a nutshell that is the main argument. Anyway, in the meantime you can look around Wikipedia - Categorical imperative, and you can follow the links throughout the article (moral philosphy, deontology, and so on).

I see morality as just an extended form of "self" preservation. Some people, and animals, have a very limited sense of "self" that applies only to them. Many people, and animals, have a sense of "self" that extends to their family, who they care about as much as themselves. Some people and animals have an even larger sense of "self" that extends to the whole tribe/pack/herd. Humans just have a more complex mentality, have a larger understanding of the world around them, and have developed various ways to group themselves, like by race, religion, nationality, sex, sexual orientation, political beliefs, sports teams, etc., etc., etc. Some, though rare, can even extend their sense of "self" to all humanity, or even all living things.
There’s no sign of objective moral standards.
The best thing we’ve got is to try and convince people that our moral standards are better. Because it is based on “self” preservation, it helps to have people consider what they’d like to happen, in certain situations.
I don’t want to be randomly killed. You don’t want to be randomly killed. So, with easy ones like this, we can easily come up with a consensus of the vast majority, that randomly killing people is wrong. Then, we make a law against randomly killing people.
I’d like to be able to say what I want. You’d like to be able to say what you want. So, we come up with a consensus of the vast majority, making it a right to be able to say what you want.
There are numerous things that the vast majority of people in the world will agree on. That still doesn’t make the moral standard objective, because it’s still based on us putting our subjective value against being killed and wanting to speak. We didn’t discover we’re valuable in some science experiment. We just decided we are.
It becomes tougher the closer to 50/50 opinion on the matter we get. These are often things we find wrapped up in political parties. Is it immoral to take money away from someone who was successful in acquiring it? Or, is it immoral to let people starve, live on the street, have no education, etc.? Some people are very much individualists. They have the smaller sense of “self”, in my opinion. While I think individual freedoms are quite important, I also think there are some minimums we should do to help others in our society, and even others in the world.
Many political debates are individual well being vs group well being. The group minded might point at studies showing that gun control makes society, as a whole, safer. The individual minded might point at someone saving themselves by shooting a bad guy. Even if there are lower rates of gun violence with gun control, they don’t want to be in that small percentage still being attacked, without having a way to defend themselves.
Religion can also pit the individual against the group. The group might think they need to weed out anything they consider immoral, while such weeding might not be very good for a lot of individuals. Other groups might find what another group to be doing highly immoral, and vice versa.
Sometimes the group is right. Sometimes the individual is right. Sometimes one group is right. Sometimes another group is right. But, of course, that’s my opinion. Even if we can agree on most things, those remaining differences can cause a lot of grief.

Let’s try explaining this a different way.
How tall are you?
Don’t worry I’ll swing this back around to the question….
When you read that, you thought about it and gave the answer in your mind in some sort of unit, perhaps feet or meters. You used language to convey information about a socially agreed upon standard. A standard that provides utility. That is, it is extremely useful.
Let me use myself as an example. I’m 6′1″ tall.
What if I said I was 7′ tall?
Am I wrong? What if I pointed out that the units of measure are subjective systems and therefore are subject to our feelings about them? Would that make my claim valid? Would that mean I'm not really 6'1" tall?
I hope everyone realizes that measurements are determined subjectively, but within the context of the system, I am objectively 6'1" tall. If I say I'm taller or shorter, even if I use words like feet or inches, I'm whatever the agreed upon standard is even if I don't agree with it.
Measurement systems are social systems of great value and are possible because people (most people) share the desire to measure things.
We value the utility that measurements give us and have chosen to value the system over any individuals claims or desires.
It is the shared social desire to achieve the utility of measurement that makes the measurement system socially possible. It's not hard to see the value of systems of measurement in places like health, commerce, education. Strictly speaking there is nothing objective about any of it.
Does the fact that people agree on it make it a good system?
No. The fact that people socially agree does not, by itself make it good or bad because to determine that society needs to decide what it is that it wants to accomplish with a system of measurement. What is to be actualized? Only once there is some agreement can the system be evaluated.
Now take the US standard system against the metric system. Is one system better than the other? Clearly, the metric system is a better system. How do we know this?
Because we can evaluate facts scientifically about the two systems with respect to what people want to accomplish. We can measure the results and come to an answer.
Moral systems are no different except what is being measured. Moral systems measure our behavior. People have desires that, at a fundamental level revolve around freedom from pain and suffering. Values arise from those desires and the social system of morality takes shape.
The values and morals that are derived from them are subjective, but once the systems are firmly in place one can say that certain actions are objectively wrong with respect to that system. But again, the fact that people agree on a system does not, in itself, make it "good". It's ironic what people claim to want and how their actions often fail to realize the goals people set for themselves.
Some obvious examples might be burning witches, slavery and human sacrifice, which at one time might have been deemed socially moral.
What changed?
Someone asked, what is it that we value? How do our actions live up to the values we hold?
Information sheds new light and that understanding leads us to hold new values and our moral systems change.
So no, morality isn't objective and more than measurements are objective. However, morality, like measurement is exceedingly useful in order to reach our individual and societal goals. Objectivity can only be realized with respect to goals and desires we hold.

I was watching a documentary a while ago on a research project; the psychologist was attempting to test and see if infants were inherently disposed to similar moral values that people hold. The researcher's results showed to about an 80% consistency, infants, who were incapable of speaking and were just beginning to recognize the sound of their own name, were predisposed to a similar moral code. The results are not solid enough to prove in a scientific sense, "true", however, they certainly do answer a very intriguing question. Another note i would like to attach to this is that earliest forms of communication are far less lingual in nature than actual vocalization.
In this same documentary, the researchers performed a few additional experiments that show the potency of non-verbal communication. A pen was passed around the room, one which they claimed to belong to Hitler, a subject that most would agree on as holding an unfavorable reputation. Amongst people of different spiritual beliefs, to include agnostics, atheists and religiously devout individuals, they observed similar reactions; the first person cringed as if the past ownership of the pen by Hitler had somehow tainted the object. This reaction implies some sort of belief that some portion of a person continues beyond their life cycle. The most interesting detail is that as the pen was passed from one individual to another, how open their expressions of disgust became, as if they were in rapport and exaggerating the intensity of this "taint" as each person relinquished possession of the pen to the next.
The point of it all is to say, you can take the social experiment a couple of different ways: 1. people have strong influence through non-verbal communication and can impact your moral code 2. people inherently hold moral values that appear as a result of either some divine influence or by a biological mechanism.
There is plenty of evidence that there is a biological mechanism that encourages moral behavior and this is the explanation that seems the most likely to be true. Frankly I don't think the argument that there is divine influence involved is a realistic explanation, but I thought it important to mention because that explanation would be the only means by which objective morality can exist because objectivity in morality would not be inferred by universal acceptance of moral ideas, but rather by an inflexible metaphysical code.

Should morals be relative or universal?
I have only two points to make, maybe more, we’ll see.
There is and there can be no meaningful or effective “should” about morals. Where there is a “should” it can only be counterproductive to its own ambitions and to its subjects, even though the results of “should” and/or belief in the objective reality of morals can appear to produce some kind of moral consistency across a group of subjects. This consistency is, however, its own kind of immorality because it can only demand conformity i.e., it cannot create love. “Should” cannot produce maturity. It cannot produce goodness. It cannot produce freedom. The very word “should” indicates an external over-riding authority that is anything but one’s own integrated free being - free of self and the need of self preservation. “Should” emanates from authority. Morals indicate essential human compromise, guided behaviour in lieu of personal truly conscious responsibility.
“Morals” cannot be universal, however, it is the desire of ideologues of various kinds to make their respective “morals” universal. Should any particular group of any kind whatsoever succeed in making their “morals” universal we will have realised hell in our time, space and planet. If you think the clash of moral systems is bad, wait until you experience a regime of universal moral imposition! Governments, religions, university hijackers and all kinds of activists the world over are pursuing such ambitions in order “to do us good”. We can be thankful that such ideologues and power mongers despise each other because that tension at least delays the dawn of imposed uniform sterility in the form of presumptuous “universal morality”. God forbid! Please!
Conversely, concoctions of “morality” can only ever be relative and impermanent, even though it appears that many if not most people seem to prefer to bear the condemning, distracting and sensitivity numbing burden of a handbag of moral instructions that tell them what to do and what not to do according to authority not their own. In fact, it seems to be important to them that they do nothing from their own authority and responsibility. This escape from becoming human (from expressing the image of God as intended) is very much like the military defence which says, “I was only following orders,” which, being interpreted means, “I am not at all responsible”.
It’s a little like love. Some say “Love!”, as in a verb, i.e., do love. That makes love a ‘moral choice’ from situation to situation. But when one is love, everything that one does is the doing of love; it cannot be otherwise. In the same way, the mind that references ‘relative’ or ‘universal’ ‘morals’ is a doer or moral principles, depending on the fears or rewards in play in the situation. By contrast, the truly Spiritual consciousness “discerns all things” with absolute and immediate pertinence. Absolute and immediate pertinence arises out of the fact of the moment not out of the memory and imposition of “morals”.
The objection that this capacity to discern with clear pertinence is too subjective an idea has some merit to it, but this is largely because it is not needed or expected to be manifested in a world that is populated by consciousnesses that are compromised by “moralities”. Consciousness and consciences are not enlivened by morals, they are dulled; that is sensitivity is not! Restated, if you breed people to be moral dependents you should expect them to be moral dependents, moral dwarfs, forever infants, i.e., not mature, not responsible, unable to discern, without personal moral authority, without the capacity to feel the deep fact of the situation and without the passionate conviction that gives compassionate courage … without sustainable conviction … because it is not of themselves.
In summary, the question affirms a nonsense which is that the genre of construct called “morals” is an absolute given. There is no such absolute genre of thing, being, fact. The assumption that there is such a thing is disastrous for human freedom, and that is why power loves it. Restated, the question gives no indication that the very idea of ‘morals’ is the the problem; it is the great compromiser of human maturity and of unconscious (i.e., un-calculated) and immediate knowing. Power forbid that you should know for yourself! Morals are matters of conscious consciousness and which indicates a state of distraction, not of awareness, not of discernment.
We each need to become human.

Objective morality is the perspective that claims about ones rights and general ideas of humanity are either true or false. For example, someone who believes in objective morality will claim that murdering a child is wrong regardless of the culture, religion, etc.
There is a simple reason why this is important: if morality is not objective, in that there is no inherent right or wrong answer to some issues, then our laws are based on nothing but will. In essence, whoever is powerful enough to right the laws can dictate what is and what isn’t moral. In this sense, you cannot actually claim murdering a child is wrong because morals would be subject to the opinions and individual morals of different people. This isn’t to say those who believe in subjective morality are bad people, only that they have no universality to their beliefs. They cannot state that anything is inherently wrong unless there is a law against it. Under this premise, it seems absurd to think that moral cannot be objective. I find it impossible to fathom a world where we accept actions like the holocaust as subjective, whereby our ruling on whether it was just or not is dictated by absolutely nothing but an opinion
Simply because we cannot agree on whether something was right or wrong doesn’t mean both sides are right. All it means is that we haven’t figured out the truth of it. Regardless of whether we have sufficient knowledge to determine if something is right or wrong, objective morality does exist. The next step is acquiring the proper knowledge and understanding to make a ruling one way or another. The latter is something we may never sufficiently achieve.

Yes, it is. The best evidence is the common sense of morality on which virtually all cultures in history agree. All cultures have their own versions, of course, and they vary according to the particulars of those cultures. But there is general agreement among all historical civilizations of the innate moral worth of refraining from murder, theft, and adultery, of showing appropriate honor to one’s parents and to the aged, for kindness rather than cruelty, of showing respect to God or the gods, of showing courage rather than cowardice and loyalty rather than betrayal, and to telling the truth.
If you want to explore this further, CS Lewis wrote two books you should read. In “Mere Christianity,” the first 1/3 of his book produces an argument for the existence of God based on humanity’s common morality, and he addresses a number of the questions that would arise in this context (like, “How do we know that our conscience is not just a physical part of ourselves, but refers to something outside of ourselves?”). In “The Abolition of Man,” he actually lists in the appendix proverbs from ancient cultures that express the same set of common moral precepts.

Nope. For any sort of moral principles to be objective, they would have to be unchanging and apply to all people in all circumstances. One way to possibly have some sort of objective morality would be to have it imposed from an external source such as a God of some sort, in which case morality becomes whatever that God says to do or not do. Unfortunately, even if you believe in a God of some sort (which I don’t), using a God as the source of objective morality quickly becomes an exercise in futility because:
Nobody can agree upon what, exactly, God has said to do and not do, even among members of the same religious communities.
Many of the things God supposedly told his children to do and not do thousands of years ago seem to have been tailored specifically for the culture in which his children lived back then [Gee, an “objective” morality that changes over time, go figure…].
God apparently refuses to provide any clarification today to clear up the various misinterpretations regarding his moral principles.
Another way to possibly have some sort of objective morality is to claim that there are fundamental laws of nature that somehow dictate what is “good” and “bad” when it comes to how we treat our fellow man. I know a number of atheists who really try to make this argument, presumably so that they can silence the theists who keep claiming that atheists can’t be moral since they have no basis for objective morality. I’m not swayed by this, however. First of all, I’m not at all swayed by the claim that objective morality is even needed in the first place to be moral. Morality is a set of principles that govern how we act toward one another, and one can follow those principles regardless of whether those principles are based on some “objective” or “absolute” standards or laws.
Second of all, I’m not convinced that there are any absolute natural laws or principles that determine (or can be used to determine) whether our actions are objectively “good” or “moral”. At most, I think that humans have, on the whole, an innate sense of empathy toward each other that tends to make us feel happy when others are happy and sad when others are sad, and that can certainly for the basis of a general principle of “treat others the way you want to be treated,” but that only goes so far. That innate empathy often only extends to members of our immediate family or tribe, and sometimes doesn’t even go that far.
It is also possible to derive some general moral principles from our long experience with civilization and our experimental discovery of what sorts of laws best help a society to run smoothly. Once again, though, I these to call these in any way “objective” or “absolute” since so many different societies and cultures throughout recorded history have come up with radically different laws.
The closest thing to any sort of “objective” morality I think we could ever really come up with is the simple realization that all humans are equally deserving of the same respect simply be virtue of being human. Different actions and situations may warrant different treatment, but the underlying principle of respect would remain a constant.

Hilter thought he was right. He liked what he did. He made Germany better. Citizens of Germany were happy. That meant he was happy, liked, etc. Plenty of people called him “a great guy”.
You know what he didn't like? The guys that tried to assassinate him. He thought they were wrong, and needed to be punished. So he did. He had them killed. After all, THEY were the enemy.
Today, we call those assassins “Heros” because (we say) what they did was right…not wrong.
So, what's the answer? Who was absolutely right and who was absolutely wrong? Not sure? It really depends on who you ask, doesn't it?
To know right from wrong, we need some rule to follow. I like the one Confucius wrote 2,500 years ago: DON’T do to others what you wouldn't want done to you.
To me, that means Hitler shouldn't have killed/slaughtered Jews and he shouldn't have invaded any countries. So, (to me) he was wrong.
One very simple rule to follow. Works well. However, I'm guessing Hitler had a different rule to follow; maybe like “Win at any cost” or something like that. He thought--and did things--based on his perspective.
I say we should all follow Confucius' rule. It allows for individual perspective while unifying people around core shared principles.

Morality is just another science.
If we extended the standards of objectivity from say ethics to say chemistry, you would be considered a crank for saying certain standards in chemistry are subjective.
Objectivity can be hard for a mere person to live up. Often, it is simply making the best of a harsh situation. If you can’t reach objectivity, you must still attempt to be objective and try your best. Situations like this are rare.
Being ethical IS NOT HARD. What is hard is WHY to be ethical. God will send you into a lake of fire does NOT cut it any-more.
I’ll out-line it for you:
Do not harm the self. No junk food, no self-mutilation, exercise regularly, etc, etc.
Do not take advantage of another person. Unless you are a vampire of some sort, you do not need to harm others much to survive. Yes, the lap-top you got was made in sweat-shops in China - you can’t avoid it completely. How-ever, you can avoid stealing from your neighbor.
Donate (not necessarily money, mind you now) to well throughly researched and credible charities.
Attempt a quasi-vegan or a true vegan life style. Eat meat if it is healthy to do so, but go full vegan if you can.
Attempt to conserve resources. Recycle. Don’t waste. So on.
Be polite. It costs very little.
Make sure the self’s needs are accounted for.
Get employed in a “clean” job. Do not work at oil companies, the FBI, the mafia, and so on.
It is just so that we happen to be born in an exceptionally immature and unethical species, where might and money makes right.
I believe and argue for that objective morality exists, it is just that this species is so immature that it is extremely hard to reach it.
Ethically we are still in the stone age while we are armed with guns and even technology out of sci-fi like 3G on smart-phones. This does not bode well. I’m still waiting on a societal collapse.
Ethics is real - our species is just very bad at being ethical.

Both the laws of the universe and the laws of morality are inviolable. These laws are not legislated. They are laws in the sense there are no exceptions. The universe is governed by physical laws. Mankind is governed by moral laws. 
If the laws of the universe were violated (e.g., killing a baby ended world hunger) morality would be violated. This shows morality is inviolable. Morality is based on the link between cause and effect.
The aforementioned thought experiment poses a solution for world hunger which reflects contempt for human well-being. Valid morality is based on our biological nature as human beings. Humans everywhere require food, water and shelter. A theory of morality, once divorced from reality, has no bearing on rational value systems.
The fact that people everywhere have an aversion to killing a baby shows there are moral absolutes. Morality collapses when cause and effect are severed. We live in an ordered universe.
No human being could live in a world where the thought experiment was valid, nor would she want to. All human actions would yield unpredictable results. Thus any action would be impossible. Action would yield results opposed to the purpose of that action. 
Humankind would be helpless without the link between cause and effect. Morality depends on human agency. Thought experiments which severe cause and effect posit a world where evil accomplishes good. In such a world there is no human agency and no morality.
In such a world, someone could not make the decision to kill the baby because that person would have no agency. The scenario is perverse. Its premise is a world where actions and consequences are divorced. In such a world, even the most repugnant acts are feasible. 
Morality is impossible in a world where the link between cause and effect is severed. A person could no sooner play baseball if the path of a thrown ball could not be predicted. This is the categorical refutation for moral thought experiments which deny cause and effect. Objective morality is based in a world where human agents control their actions and predict the results.

Morality is subjective, based on a lot of evolutionary, psychological, and sociological constructs, and even within a society, the moral code changes as the society changes.
All social species of animals have moral codes in their societies (eg wolves, chimps, orcas, piranhas) which are the “rights” and “wrongs” of each group’s code of behavior.
And let me throw this logical chunk of gold at you… Moral Relativists have always insisted that morality is relative (based largely on the observations that I mentioned in the paragraph above this one). Moral Absolutists (or Moral Objectivists for this question) insist that Morality is Absolute or Objective meaning that there are some moral truths that are always true. The Relativists then will request such an Objective Moral Tenant, and the Objectivists have always, in every case, in the history of philosophy, utterly and completely failed to deliver one. By the simplest logic, morality is relative until someone can produce a moral absolute… and objective moral standard.
There isn’t one.

Ethics and morals are not just inter-related but mutually determining and realizing. In other words, without viable moral conversation in which to become so animated or realized, ethical values and standards exist only potentially, as literally Utopian ideals, reflecting possible future conversations. Without a real dialogue, i.e., an ethics so animated, what may appear to be moral conversation may actually reflect the implicit conceptual reduction of conduct to mere behavior, of conversation to mere discourse, of engaged concern about real priorities to disengaged and finally unethical rule-following—the potentially most deadly form practical reasoning can assume—rationalization.
Ethics and morality are thus closely interconnected with culture and history but emerge from a stance of reflection upon them. Particular ethical systems and moral rules must be understood as related to their particular historical and cultural contexts. Yet, the reflective dimensions essential to ethical standards and moral rules suggest that rational, dialogical criteria pertaining to a reflective conversation about conduct would apply. Developing such criteria might begin with identifying moments of possibility and choice in the real and enduring structures of our actual lives since conduct is never merely the repetition or reproduction of those structures.
Where ethos is made the object of thematic scrutiny, practices we have taken for granted become matters of concern; my conduct and yours become problematic. Morality reflects the ongoing necessity to re-interpret ourselves and our ethical systems in terms of their relevance to the ongoing conversation of life.
In developing and re-connecting the ethical and moral in contrast with notions of ethos and mores, rather than feigning "objectivity" we can open a broader conversation about conduct, as a function of which, the standards implicit in practices can become conceptualized in our reflective determination of norms. Occasionally at the Readware Institute, we take on conceptual modeling problems. A few years ago, we took on a study in behavioral economics suggesting how thinking about the emic and etic aspects of behavior in economic decisions may lead to the "good life". as in the pursuit happiness.
This does not mean we go back to Skinner; on the contrary, since this conception emerged from a consideration of conduct as a form of social-cultural behavior, e.g. in behavioral economics, it is not surprising to find that ethnographers have anticipated the central contrast from which we saw it emerge. Ethnographers commonly make a distinction between the etic and emic dimensions of the study of cultural practices, which reflects the difference between the structural and reflective dimensions of meaning. Otherwise, these structures are known only to a few practitioners in any of the concerned fields.
The etic/emic distinction is, at its core, a distinction between meaningful things and the usually hidden or implicit structures believed to be essential to their decipherment. While it belongs to linguistics as we reported, this view is quite different than the linguistic view of Saussure and his followers. In fact, we usually call the linguists of Saussure, Harris, and the language games od Wittgenstein: “shallow semantics” for the reason that they ignore these and other deep semantic distinctions altogether.
According to Peter Amato in Language, Reflection and the Dimensions of Conduct. (Human Nature Review): Meaningful behavior occurs in a context set by a stable, structured, ‘grammatical’ system, according to which features capable of conveying and conferring meaning are organized and arranged into meaningful actions and utterances. The study of meaningful activity presents ethnographers with the constant need to recognize the difference between the elements and components of meaning and meanings themselves. The ethnographer anticipates that cultural activity has a ‘double nature’: When the meaning of institutions, practices, and beliefs is considered independent of the participants’ ideas and beliefs, we say they are considered from an etic perspective. On the other hand, it is necessary to recognize that the institutions, practices, and beliefs of a people are not only an abstract system but real living features of a culture.
To this extent, practices are not merely structurally capable of conveying meaning, but they actually mean. This makes them a different kind of object—one whose subjective element is irreducibly present. The ethnographer observes a ritual ceremony and describes the clothing, movements, and expressions of all its participants in detail. From the standpoint typically assumed by the scientific observer, these elements can be sorted out and re-ordered so as to derive a new meaning not given in or by the performance itself or its participants.
The meaning of the event intended by the scientific observer will be cast in terms of measured empirical observations, in what that observer might call ‘neutral,’ ‘objective’ language. But the etic dimensions of observed behavior are not simply to be identified with the ‘objective,’ ‘empirical,’ ‘causal,’ account that might be given by a typical western scientist. Etic and emic dimensions structure all observed human behavior since it always can be interpreted in terms that are independent of what its participants say. In other words, the etic meaning of an event, as described from the standpoint of a western scientific system of meaning, is, in a non-trivial sense, also really an emic account reflecting a western observer's practice of interpretation. 'Independent of what their practice means to participants,' is a category that belongs to our local system of meaning, which we call the scientific observer's perspective. But, boil the meaningful world down to formal constituents and what one has is formal constituents of meaning. We can utter nothing meaningful about the practice without reconstituting it in our terms, emically. In other words, the etic meaning of an event, as described from the standpoint of a western scientific system of meanings, is, in a non-trivial sense, also really an emic account or a westerner’s practice of interpretation, from a standpoint outside its system of meanings. ‘Independent of what participants in this practice actually tend to think and say,’ is a category belonging to our local systems of meaning, reflecting the core of the scientific observer’s perspective.
But, ‘as it appears from within the horizon of local interpretations and practices,’ is a category that must also be regarded as applicable to the system of meanings familiar to the scientific observer as to anyone else. The distinction of etic and emic aspects of meaning suggests a parallel that Amato believes 'can assist the re-articulation of ethics and morality in a broader philosophy of conduct: the cultural values and unreflective attitudes with which ethics begins to provide a structural framework in terms of which the reflective expression and conversation carried out as ethical-moral discussion occurs.' In this sense, he believes, a tradition of conversation about conduct facilitates its own continuation by opening itself up to Human reflection; i.e., for the creation out of the ‘grammar and syntax’ of a structuring past new utterances that make unanticipated sense in present usage. Any cultural world contains etic structural features out of which practices and beliefs endure and structure from one generation to the next. This is the reason, by the way, AI cannot be saved by Natural language; while originally a linguistic distinction, the etic/emic distinction is all but lost in the language under the guise of modernity,
But cultural reproduction is not merely the repetition of the speech of the ancestors; warns Amato. Still less could it be a replication of its own objectivity or a formal recreation of the structures that confer meanings without meaning something all along the way. Cultural life is a dynamic between relatively enduring structures and new meaningful utterances formed from them. Culture and ethos are the relatively enduring structures in reflection upon which ethical and moral meanings are instituted with an urgency and originality that is always marked by their real circumstances.
So morality and ethics are neither simply synonymous, nor antithetical. The distinction between ethics and ethos was offered above as a starting point toward clarifying how culture and tradition relate to ethics as the ground upon which it reflects. This suggested a view of morality as a conversation about conduct, realizing reflection upon relatively enduring ethical values in which the prevailing morality of a time reflects a consensus about how generally held values should be interpreted and applied under local conditions. But, from a hermeneutical perspective, such conventions reflect merely a moment in an ongoing conversation that must continually re-interpret its own relevance and meaning in relation to new, real contingencies. There is thus a continual interpretive demand understood historically as ethical debate driven by experience and history, as new questions and choices force us to reflect anew on the priorities implicit in our choices. Moral reflection and debate are thus dialectically related to the values they call upon us to instantiate and realize, or overthrow. For example:
In the case of behavioral economics, we can see the types of entities that are instantiated and realized. It is clearly up to the individual to reflect on and overthrow these values as well as adopt their chosen superpower at their own risk (See the paper linked above). This way of thinking about ethics and morals allows us to identify ethical values as historically conditioned and only ever relatively, falsely permanent.
If ethical systems of values and ideas of the good exist only in our conversation about what to do, as suggested here, they live and die in the practices and institutions whose results at any given moment they are. This means ethical values are extremely tenuous as well as tenacious and persistent, just like culture. Culture passes from person to person through the most subtle of gestures and carves a niche in each mind of millions through vast and monumental creations. Yet, existing only in the minds, actions, and artifacts of persons, its venue is history, and it thus depends on human choices and actions. It is always open to reflection and critique because without them it has no life.
Note also: A careful discussion of the meanings of and controversies about the etic/emic distinction in anthropology can be found in Marvin Harris, Theories of Culture in Postmodern Times, (California: AltaMira Press, 1999), especially chapter 2, pages 31-48. Harris particularly warns against confusing the etic/emic distinction with the commonplace distinction between objectivity and subjectivity, since this identifies objectivity solely with the outsider perspective of the student or scientist of culture.
But participants themselves have an idea about how the world is structured independent of themselves and their own subjectivity. This means that the outsider and the insider both have etic and emic meaning-structures. Again, this returns the distinction to its roots in linguistics: the etic should be thought of as a classificatory structuring system or code which confers meaning but does not actually ‘mean’ itself, like the phonetics of the spoken language. This ‘objective’ structure transcends and links all competent language users. Yet, all so linked remain speakers, with definite things to say and to mean. The contrast of ethics and morality with ethos and mores shows that the ought is essential to conduct, for it arises upon reflection, in a stance of self-awareness and assessment of practices and of ourselves as actors for whom conduct matters. A commonplace way to say this, Amatto suggests and I concur, is that from an ethical or a moral perspective we consider ourselves responsible for our actions.

We may not have proof, as objective as 2 + 2 = 4. However, we know what it means to treat human beings well. We know the virtues which are necessary for good relationships and communities. And these same virtues are the building blocks of civilizations.
Moreover, the opposite position of relativism is intrinsically flawed, because it eats itself.
And without objective principles of right and wrong, individual rights, common good, justice, responsibility, leadership, wisdom, excellence, and everything we value turns to shifting sand and looses every ounce of meaning. That’s the worst result one could expect.
The historical record of the above bears this out. Relativism leaves power without accountability, fairness, responsibility, or justice.
Yes, some folks perceive ethics differently. Usually these are the people in power, who are by definition biased.

The God who created people has empowered them with original gifts; the gifts of minds, intelligence, and the conscience are internal personal Prophets for each human to guide him to the basic measures of the good things to do and the bad things to avoid
People who never heard of Prophets are not forsaken because God has equipped them by internal prophets and they will be guided to the wisdom by their original gifts
The person can have morality based on the gifts of reason and conscience if he likes for others what he likes for himself (applying the golden rule)
The person becomes immoral when he does not make use of the gift of conscience and allow himself to be wicked and unjust.
We have not created the gifts of conscience and reason.
Morality and good deeds are not enough for salvation; salvation requires obedience and repentance in addition to the good deeds.
We should remember that the true religion teachings will not change
Feeding the hungry is a virtue as taught by all prophets and it will remain so until heaven and earth pass away
Defending the oppressed is a virtue as taught by all prophets and it will remain so until heaven and earth pass away
Self-constraints, patience, and resisting temptations are virtues, and will remain so until heaven and earth pass away
Abortion is a sin because it means killing an innocent soul
and it will remain as a sin until heaven and earth pass away
Homosexuality is a sin as taught by all prophets
Premarital sex is a sin as taught by all prophets
Sex outside marriage is a sin as taught by all prophets
and it will remain as a sin until heaven and earth pass away
Creation of male and female is one of the signs of God; marriage is the recommended relationship between male and female.
Qur’an 30:21
‘And one of His signs is that He created for you spouses from among yourselves so that you may find comfort in them. And He has placed between you compassion and mercy. Surely in this are signs for people who think’
The common ground of all religions and all different sources of wisdom is ‘the golden rule’
What you do not want done to yourself, do not do to others. Confucius
Do not do unto others whatever is injurious to yourself. – Zoroaster, Shayast-na-Shayast 13.29
“Do not do to others what angers you if done to you by others.” - Socrates
"What thou avoidest suffering thyself seek not to impose on others."— Epictetus (55-135)
"Do not do to others what would anger you if done to you by others." – Isocrates
Putting oneself in the place of another, one should not kill nor cause another to kill – Buddha
One who, while himself seeking happiness, oppresses with violence other beings who also desire happiness, will not attain happiness hereafter. – Buddha, Dhammapeada, 10
“Resolve to be tender with the young, compassionate with the aged, sympathetic with the striving and tolerant with the weak and wrong. Sometime in your life, you will have been all of these.” Gautama Buddha
No one saves us but ourselves. No one can and no one may. We ourselves must walk the path ― Gautama Buddha, Sayings Of Buddha
“Remember always that you are just a visitor here, a traveler passing through. Your stay is but short and the moment of your departure unknown.” Dhammavadaka
“It is a man's own mind, not his enemy or foe, that lures him to evil ways.” ― Gautama Buddha
Hatred does not cease by hatred, but only by love; this is the eternal rule. Buddha
One should never do that to another which one regards as injurious to one’s own self. This, in brief, is the rule of dharma. Other behaviour is due to selfish desires. – Brihaspati, Mahabharata. Hinduism
Analysis of those teachings show that they are similar to the prophet’s teachings, similar spiritual fruits from similar gardens watered by the same spring, inspired and gifted by the same great creator
He who sows the ground with care and diligence acquires a greater stock of religious merit than he could gain by the repetition of ten thousand prayers. Zoroaster (c.628 - c.551)
It is o.k. to question the purpose of life; that is a wise thing to do.
What is the value of life if we do not know the purpose of that life?
“It is the greatest good for an individual to discuss virtue every day...for the unexamined life is not worth living” - Socrates

Lets identify our starting premises.
There is no moral law giving God
There is moral law giving God
That kind of answers the question before one actually answers it.
But, since I personally start with premise #2 … I will add an additional significant point:
Morality should not be a cook book for legalism…I.e. “right and wrong” behavior. The purpose of God's morality is to help us maintain that which in Christianity is what God reckons as true righteousness: I.e. faith, and specifically faith in the Gospel. However, maintaining a trust in God's promises rather than trying to please God by living a cookbook Christian lifestyle.
Morality than is not the end, but a means to an end…faith= trusting God
Morality, or the Law, then convicts us of our sins and sin nature and points us to Christ, the Cross and the Gospel of faith.

And oh, by the way, the ultimate effect of the scientific confirmation of the existence of souls and reincarnation will be the absolute, utter, permanent, irrevocable destruction of all evil on Earth. Because morality will finally have been proven to be objective. See my story at the end.
The basic problem you have to consider—-and that scientists have never, ever, considered, not even for a nanosecond—-is the SUPREME threat sentients pose to a Universe.
Sentients have the power to blow the Universe COMPLETELY to Hell and gone. Stephen Hawking, bless his little heart, dreamed up an elegantly simple way ONE sentient could do it by pressing a button ONCE. I will lay out the Stephen Hawking Method For Destroying The Entire Universe a little further down.
So: Suppose you are a Universe Engineer. You have been handed the problem of designing a Universe that is going to evolve sentients. Sentients who, moreover, have been directly required by the Boss to possess the property of completely, totally free will.
It gradually sinks in you have an INCREDIBLE design headache.
How in the WORLD are you going to stop all those trillions and trillions and TRILLIONS of sentients, every single one of whom will have the theoretical capacity of destroying the entire Universe, from doing just that? While retaining completely free will?
Man, that’s just impossible. Just flat-out impossible. You go back and ask the Boss to let that free-will requirement go. It’s just too dangerous.
The Boss says: “NO!”
Back to the drawing board. You make your coffee, grumble to yourself about impossible Bosses with their impossible demands, lean back in your chair, and you think.
You think, and you think, and you think, and you think.
And one day, the solution hits you out of nowhere, a bolt from the blue.
You will make every single sentient—-an ETERNAL being. Beings for whom existence has NO limit. This will keep your free-will-sentient-containing Universe safe for a brilliantly simple reason.
Nobody sane is going to burn down their house while they are still in it.
Right?
And even if somebody tried, all the other free-will sentients would QUICKLY exercise their own free will and put a CRASHING halt to it.
HA! THAT’S IT! THAT’S IT!
So you immediately set up all your laws of physics so that all sentients are eternal beings. And bang, you have set up a Universe that is completely, perfectly safe from its free-will sentients. The, ahem, Boss is gonna be really, really happy with you.
Please note that “keeping the Universe safe from its sentients” is a totally logical, totally SCIENTIFIC, reason for believing in an afterlife. No citing religious texts. No calls for blind faith, no call to “Belie-e-e-ve, brother!”
Just calm, clear logic.
You now have a totally rational reason to go into the lab and try to build a soul-detector.
Now, let me repeat all of the above in a more rigorous fashion.
And would you like to live in a world where nobody is afraid to die? Where you personally are no longer afraid to die? It’s only a single experiment away.
Oh, by the way, the eventual result of the scientific confirmation of the existence of souls will be the complete and total destruction of all evil on Earth. See my story at the end.
Life after death is real, the cold-sober scientific truth, the way the Universe works.
Life after death is not a fiction or a fantasy. It is real, something vitally necessary in order for the Universe to be stable, mainly to keep the Universe’s sentients from blowing the Universe the Hell up.
On this one thing, the existence of the soul, those silly religious woo-woos are ABSOLUTELY right. Those moonbeam-dancing, ley-line-loving, crystal-worshiping, long-haired-hippie-freak woo-woos are totally dead-bang right.
I can prove ALL of this---if you are smart enough to understand it. (Although intelligence really isn’t the main problem, but rather the ability to think clearly and objectively. THAT is rare, even among scientists. THIS IS AN EASY PROBLEM TO SOLVE. Considered simply as an exercise in logic, the problem of the existence of the soul is entirely trivial.)
I can prove it all by the best, most rigorous method the human race has ever found for finding the truth.
The scientific method.
Observation, hypothesis, and finally confirmation by testing in the lab. By building a soul-detector and detecting souls in the lab. The detecting principle, I suspect, will be rapid changes in Planck’s Constant.
You don’t even have to use people. You can use cats. Why cats? Cat-soul dived through my chest once. Also, soul theory indicates the source of emotion is the soul, not the brain, and therefore any animal that shows emotion, in particular love, is an eternal being and has a soul.
The observation and hypothesis parts I have solved. I’d get the third one too, if I had the money. Alas, I don’t. It would take a million bucks just to start. I continue to hope some bad-boy millionaire scientist or engineer will trip over my Quora answers one day. (You hearing this, Elon? Would you like to smash the whole damn world? I can show you how.)
Let me give you the short version, then the long version.
Rigorously objective analysis of human behavior reveals human behavior contains the assumption of eternal existence, on quite a number of levels. Since human bodies are certainly not eternal, human beings MUST contain an eternally existing component, i.e. they must have souls.
You might object something as weird as souls could only exist if the Universe had some EXTREMELY powerful need for them. You would be correct. There actually is an extremely powerful need for a Universe’s sentients to ALL be eternal beings who have souls.
It inhibits the sentients from destroying their Universe.
If a Universe’s sentients are NOT eternal beings, then the Universe logically becomes Hell. Because most sentients’ lives are composed mostly of pain, and unless their existence was without limit, their pain, and their lives, would be completely meaningless.
Live in Hell, and then die.
Sentients would destroy any such Universe in a cosmic heartbeat. It would be the MORAL thing to do.
And oh my, yes, all sentients possess the theoretical capacity to destroy the entire Universe, as one aspect of sentients is knowledge of how the Universe works, as in the ability to write down the Universe’s fundamental laws and then use those laws to change the Universe around them as they see fit.
Stephen Hawking embodied the entire situation perfectly. If anybody understood the Universe’s fundamental laws, it was Stephen Hawking. If anybody suffered at the hands of the Universe, it was Stephen Hawking. (Return to us quickly, Stephen. We need your mind.)
And waddya know, Stephen Hawking found a way to destroy the whole damn Universe.
"If people possess immortal souls, it should be possible to logically deduce this by objective analysis of their actions."

Do I think right and wrong exist? Yes.
Do I think objective morality exists? No. Morality is the code of conduct we use to determine whether our behavior is appropriate. It must, by definition, always be subjective. There is no objective moral relationship between a rock and a river. There is no universal moral field where force carriers of morality--call them "morons" if you will--govern the moral interaction between other particles.
Morality is relative to human behavior and human action.
What is moral? What is immoral? Harming other people unnecessarily is immoral. I like the way Terry Pratchett summed it up in the book Carpe Jugulum:
“And that’s what your holy men discuss, is it?”
“Not usually. There is a very interesting debate raging at the moment about the nature of sin, for example.”
“And what do they think? Against it, are they?”
“It’s not as simple as that. It’s not a black and white issue. There are so many shades of gray.”
“There’s no grays, only white that’s got grubby. I’m surprised you don’t know that. And sin, young man, is when you treat people as things. Including yourself. That’s what sin is.”
“It’s a lot more complicated than that—”
“No. It ain’t. When people say things are a lot more complicated than that, they means they’re getting worried that they won’t like the truth. People as things, that’s where it starts.”
“Oh, I’m sure there are worse crimes—”
“But they starts with thinking about people as things.”

Morality is simply a behavior or principle identified as “good”. Good and bad are defined objectively (rather, they can be…).
As an example; various ethnic groups have long histories of high-density living arrangements and have independently developed moral principles involving ritual cleanliness. These include many Asian sub-cultures, many from the Indian sub-continent and Ashkenazi Jews.
Serendipitously, we have empirical data on the health outcomes of various immigrant groups that have settled the Lower East Side of Manhattan and East European Jews, in spite of living in the same squalid conditions as preceding groups (the Irish), never experienced a cholera epidemic (unliked the Irish before them…).
The Irish never developed a culture of personal hygiene because they were a rural people and aside from the difficulties of maintain personal hygiene in those circumstances, the low population density inherent in rural life, discounted its value.
The more interesting question is how we arrive at an objective morality.
Those principles that have been proven to be consistently moral (good) for humanity have not been the product of intellectual dialectic (theological or secular…), but a far more ambiguous prescriptive avenues, namely religious and cultural practice. This doesn’t mean that all religious behavior equates to objective morality, but highly-persistent religious and/or cultural practice appears to have been positively reinforced by repeated outcomes over many generations.
On the other hand, various intellectually-derived moral systems, particularly those of social utopias, simply did not survive, or in the case of Marxism, actually resulted in incalculable human suffering and death.
Be careful with defining objective morality. Arrogance kills.

Objective: Independent of the Observer or in this case Definer. Opposite of Subjective which is dependent on the Observer/Definer
Morality: Principles concerning the distinction between right and wrong or good and bad behavior. (Oxford Dictionary). Often confused with Ethics.
Ethics: The rules of conduct recognized in respect to a particular class of human actions or a particular group or culture.
Morals are a more individual based set of principles and ethics are a more universal set of rules of conduct.
Now add to this the fact that our species are mammals and really just civilized animals and therefore, like all animals, we have certain traits that help define us as a species.
We have evolved from a family based unit of wanders to a societal/communal based group. With this our codes of conduct and definition of right and wrong has changed. When the family unit was primary, then any outside force that was unknown could be deemed as a threat and handled. It would not have been considered murder anymore than killing the Tiger that was stalking your family, because we were once in the middle of the food chain, would be considered murder.
Then these family groups started bonding together for shared security. Suddenly the perspective changed from an “I” to a “WE” or “US”. Focus on the survival of the group outweighed the survival of any one individual.
With larger groups came changes in what was consider right and wrong. For example: When the population of the tribe was small and life expectancy was not very high, reproduction was a primary focus for the long term survival of the tribe. This translates into 1) a lower acceptable age of consent (not that it was called age of consent back then). In every other species, age of maturity means age of reproductive ability and our earliest ancestors most likely thought the same thing. 2) Non acceptance of unions which would not increase the population of the tribe meaning same gender unions.
If we look at the religious texts throughout time we see that 1) age of maturity is considered to be the Puberty and that getting married at this point was acceptable and 2) homophobic gods which detest homosexual activity in the human species but allows it in other animals.
So is there such a thing as an Objective Morality. In my opinion the answer is NO.
Morally Acceptable Behaviors change over time and are a reflection of the security of the community. Empathy is an evolution trait that permits individuals to live in a group setting and most Morals revolve around Empathy towards others.
In today’s world, in small tribes you still see young teens having babies and being married. You still see an acceptance of incest. You still see that outsiders are deemed as a threat to the security of the group and are treated accordingly.
In today’s “civilized” world, we are still Tribal, it is just that our tribes can be counted in the Millions and therefore the survival of our Tribe is not a daily concern. Most of the world does not even think about the possibility of our species no longer existing.
If the moral laws of our society are really Objective then they would be Universal. They would not be affect by Time. They would not be affect by the size and strength of the Tribe.
There is Group/Tribal Subjective Morality and then there is Individual Subjective Morality. As most of the time these align our species has thrived. They align because they are both based on Empathy, not on some commandments put forth by some super-powerful entity. The idea of Objective Morality only exists because we have invented gods and given them ownership over Life, Death and Morality.
Those who feel the need to give a god mastery over morality tend to think that those without a god (Atheists) and those that worship other gods (Heretics and Pagans and such) have no foundation upon which a moral framework can rest. This is absurd of course. I know some Theist that have very low morals because they believe that if the seek forgiveness it will be given so they have a get out of jail free card. Not all Theists think this way so if you are reading this and you are a Theist and you don’t think this way then great but don’t respond by either 1) accusing me of generalizing or 2) telling me I am wrong, that no Theist in your particular group would behave badly because they have a get out of jail free card called Forgiveness. I also know some Theist that have very high moral standards and try their best to live by the codes set up in their scriptures.
But guess what you Atheists haters out there….the same exists for Atheists. There are some who have very low standards and some who have very high standards. The only difference is that the Atheist neither blames a supernatural entity for their bad behavior nor gives praise to a supernatural entity for their good behavior.

Is it even reasonable to assume there is objective morality?
Oh, most certainly.
That doesn’t mean absolute morality though. Once the meaning of the word morality is agreed upon (and hardly it won’t be about promotion of well being, or something of the sort), one can safely built a rational, objective-driven moral framework to base his/her decisions.
That not only is an objective morality, but it is arguably superior (in terms of efficiency/effectiveness) than any alternative.

In Nietzsche’s Parable of The Madman, Nietzsche prophesised the end result of rejecting subjective morality:
The madman jumped into their midst and pierced them with his eyes. "Whither is God?" he cried; "I will tell you. We have killed him -- you and I. All of us are his murderers. But how did we do this? How could we drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What were we doing when we unchained this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now? Whither are we moving? Away from all suns? Are we not plunging continually? Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is there still any up or down? Are we not straying, as through an infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is not night continually closing in on us? Do we not need to light lanterns in the morning? Do we hear nothing as yet of the noise of the gravediggers who are burying God? Do we smell nothing as yet of the divine decomposition? Gods, too, decompose. God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him.
How shall we comfort ourselves, the murderers of all murderers? What was holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our knives: who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must we ourselves not become gods simply to appear worthy of it? There has never been a greater deed; and whoever is born after us -- for the sake of this deed he will belong to a higher history than all history hitherto."
Here the madman fell silent and looked again at his listeners; and they, too, were silent and stared at him in astonishment. At last he threw his lantern on the ground, and it broke into pieces and went out. "I have come too early," he said then; "my time is not yet. This tremendous event is still on its way, still wandering; it has not yet reached the ears of men. Lightning and thunder require time; the light of the stars requires time; deeds, though done, still require time to be seen and heard. This deed is still more distant from them than most distant stars -- and yet they have done it themselves.””
Here Nietzsche confronts the existential reality: a world spun out of control by the abandonment of a higher morality
Some argue that our morals come from an evolutionary distilled wisdom that tribal sages have honed over the ages as a survival mechanism-This is confusing survival with an objective preference, not a subjective moral code. But, and it’s a big “but”, if this were true, we would see great strides of progress as intelligent man syphons out all the unethical dross. However, atheism started to emerge in the 19th Century and lo and behold, the 20th Century was the bloodiest period in modern history (see chart at end). Just look at modern Jerusalem; two groups with opposing world views that have being going on for six thousand years, one group with a world view of unforgiveness. How to you stand in a room and arbitrate two opposing world views like this? Let me put it this way, if heavenly wisdom does not curb evil, what chance does subjective morality have? Yes, you do not need to be a believer to be good, but I still like to lock my doors at night.

Is there such thing as objective morality?
There can be objective morality but the premises we base them off of are subjective.
IE what we choose as our basis for morality and what we are trying to achieve is subjective.
From that though we can make objective statements built on top of that.
Normally when people talk about objective morality they are referring to a religious basis. But even if you believe in a god or gods the morals they’ve defined are objective only because you accept their subjective reasons for moral laws.
Personally I don’t care that someone believes in some god. That isn’t a reason for me to think that what you consider moral is some how objective.
What we have to do is find a common premise we can agree on then we can see how objective decisions are made.
Is killing other person objectively immoral? I don’t think so. In fact I can objectively show, based on well being and a reduction in suffering, how in some cases ending the life of another would be the objectively moral thing to do. But that would rely on 2 or more people agreeing that well being and a reduction in suffering is the goal.
Since you’ll never get everyone to agree on what you base morality on you’ll never be able to have objective morality everyone agrees with.

Morals are, by definition, universal. Is it OK to torture babies for fun? If morals are not universal, then why do all people except a few psychopaths, answer that question with a resounding if nor repulsive “No!”
Can it be that murder is immoral in one location and moral in another? How about rape or other sexual abuse? The list goes on.
Once you think morals are subjective, then you must answer, subject to what? The only answers to that are: Subject to you, and 2) subject to society (this was the Nazi defense at Nuremberg) that is, society tells us what is right and wrong. Well, that fails spectacularly. And a moral system you make up is not a moral system, it is virtually, do whatever you want to. It is logical equivalent to no morals at all. As Dostoevsky wrote in The Brothers Karamazov, without God, all things are permissible.
Dostoevsky was right.
Without a universal standard, we owe an apology to the Nazi who we executed after the war trials. You have no basis for judging anyone’s actions in any manner at all. We should actually stop using the terms right and wrong because nothing is wrong, there is no standard by which to measure it. “Torturing that baby was wrong to you, but not to me, to me it was fun. Who are you to force your moral system on me?”
Let’s scale that does a little to the recent examples of girls or groups of girls being held hostage by a man for forces sex. Do you really think that is OK to him, but wrong to everyone else? That is individual moral relativism. Who are we to judge? But we do judge that, and rightly so. Without absolute moral standards, there is no just judgement, no justice.
Be mindful here, that means all that is left is violence. Police have policing rights only because they have a gun to enforce it. The Nazi were not wrong, just unpopular. But how could you be popular killing five to six million Jews, three million Soviet prisoners of war, two million Soviet civilians, more than one million Polish civilians, one million plus Yugoslav civilians, around 70,000 men, women and children with mental and physical handicaps, and more than 200,000 gypsies, then unknown numbers of homosexuals, resistance fighters, and Jehovah’s Witness, all because they did not fit the Nazi version of a superior race. But if morals are relative, then so is the atrocity. We can say only that we don’t like it, not that it was wrong. It was unpopular.
Is this the kind of world you wish to live in where Mother Teresa and Adolf Hitler are moral equivalents?
There can be no responsibility for your actions because there is no standard to measure responsibility by. There are only laws, and violence to enforce them.

“Is it even reasonable to assume there is objective morality?”
If by “objective morality”, one means “a single moral framework which applies to all people, in all places, at all times”, then the answer is “No, obviously not.”
Morality has varied across place, time and culture. It has shifted over time within the same culture (e.g. the acceptability of slavery, or the acceptance of marriage applying to same-sex couples).
We have no universal reference point from which to assert a universal morality, and no good reason to believe that such a morality exists.
After all, if person A has a sheet of paper on which they insist is written the one, true, universal objective morality, and person B likewise has such a sheet of paper, but the content of each paper differs, how would we go about determining which code, if either, was correct?

As always start by defining absolute and morality….cause is kinda tricky …moral seems is not related to simple statements example, is steal moral? if you say nope i say steal from a king that takes heavy taxes of their people make them starve is immoral …if you say yes then take a children candy is good….
Seems that do something moral is more related to do something that make us feel good. I usually like separate ethics of morality thinking that morality is something that is construct the person (knowning or unkowning) about how act in some conditions, or if they think that their action feel good or not. And ethics as something that a society defines for function based in the moral of their members.
Now i think absolute is something that is true for all consciences, if were for only humans then theist notions fall(for any theist that don’t agree with it). I use the world absolute as something that is valid for all that could understand the argument, in other words something that is true for all consciences.. if that happen i can guarantee that any new child or culture that born will accept it.
With those two definitions exist something absolute (being moral , truth or anything…), that is same as ask exist something that all conscience will accept as truth? my conclusion is not…if exist something like that first should appear natural on consciences that is each person now have it, second all consciences already agreed on it and sadly not all has been agreed as truth. Cause any conscience could say that is false cause he don’t understand it, or don’t want believe is truth.
i prefer use terms as social (human ) absolutes as something temporal that all people has agreed on , and that any new member can be indoctrinated in believe it Example maths. But is noticed that actions of humans are too elaborated to think and guarantee that i could make a moral human absolute. But its possible have a Ethic human absolute, example, the humans right that we agree and put as laws for any nation.

We can objectively say morality exists. We have observed it, even in other animals than humans. It’s a pattern of behavior displayed by many animals.
Are the rules of morality objectively defined? No.
Bear with me.
Why is ISIS evil?
Because they make hundreds of thousands of people suffer.
Why is it wrong to cause suffering?
Because you wouldn’t want someone else to make you suffer.
And that’s the crux of the matter. At the heart of morality lies the Golden Rule. That makes it subjective by definition, because it deals with personal experience.
The idea of “objective” or “absolute” morality has some intuitive appeal because most people more or less agree on what “suffering” means. We’re then tempted to generalize it and claim it is “objective”.
Except it’s not. It’s just a lot of people holding the same subjective opinion.
For example, virtually everyone (subjectively) agrees that killing is wrong, because nobody would like to get murdered. That doesn’t make killing objectively wrong, it just means the majority of (subjective) individuals hold the same opinion, to the point of consensus. It’s precisely because such opinions are part of a large consensus that they are often confused for objective facts.
That’s also why we can assign “degrees of wrongness” to actions. It depends on how much we fear someone else would do that to us. Murdering someone is far worse than lying to someone, because I’d rather have someone lie to me than murder me.

I believe that term is oxymoronic. Had you asked about objective ethicality, I’d be inclined to say yes in the sense that no society allows murder due to sudden momentary anger of one person towards the victim. Which ultimately has evolved out of universal human respect for the right of every individual (i.e.,already born) human life, to the persistence of that life.
This is true even though there is no proof that anyone, ever, chose their own life. Being born is not a choice, but once it happens to you, you are protected from losing it by another’s hand. So therefore, killing somebody is never a sanctioned legal choice, any more than being born is ever a purposeful sentient decision. And that right there, the very heart of that dichotomy, is ethics.
Said another way, we all just agree, even without extensive social discourse, that someone walking around breathing air, has the inalienable right to continue doing that - and someone taking that away from you has violated the most basic human right there is, and should be severely punished. That's Law, and it's premise is ethics.
Morality says that same thing too, but it also says things like “wives, don't cheat on your husbands” - and while ethics may technically agree with that, the law doesn't give a shit. The law practically mocks morality in ways like that - regardless of the letter of the actual legal code - which shows that laws are built and interpreted upon ethics, and not morality. And the difference is, ethics are clearly malleable where morality obviously is not.
Sure, places like Saudi Arabia build laws on the “morality” of their local religions, but those are isolated instances . Looking at the earth as a whole, considering all 200+ nations, the universal constant of law is quite clearly ethics - and not morality. And most nations find the laws of places that govern upon “morality” to be detestable violations of human rights.
Yes, I’m American, so you could jump to the conclusion that my argument is based on our “separation of church and state.” But our very currency states “In God We Trust” - yet our Constitution guarantees freedom of religion. So I'm saying that as Americans, we rely on ethics, not morality, to craft our legal code - and so do nearly all nations.
So although I would need to much more carefully craft my argument that perhaps there is an objective ethicality, I feel absolutely certain that based on actual past and present human societies and actions and consequences, there is no objective morality. Maybe there is no objective ethicality either, but objective morality as a concept simply feels like a cruel joke to me. It just ain't so.

The wording of your question is both interesting, and revealing.
Should morals be absolute — not are morals absolute.
The question is internally inconsistent. By what standard should morals be absolute? A moral standard? But then, that standard would itself have to be absolute.
Similarly, if morals should be relative, then by what standard should they be relative? A moral standard? But such a standard would need to be absolute, because if it were were relative, then morals themselves would not always be relative, and would sometimes be absolute.
In short, morality, like truth, is one of those concepts that are implicitly both universal, and absolute. These are called categorical concepts.
The categorical nature of these concepts is why, despite the naturalistic and materialistic bent of contemporary philosophy, the objectivity of morality has not been disproved, although neither has it been proved.

Assume you’re instructed to draw a picture of a working chair. You then draw a picture of a chair missing both front and back legs on the right side. After you submit the picture, you’re instructed to complete that picture and resubmit it. Reasonable.
So you add the legs and resubmit the picture. Your picture is rejected again. You protest that you have drawn the whole chair.
You’re instructed that you have only drawn the chair as you see it, what you’re being asked to do is also draw the chair from all possible vantages, visual and otherwise. You’re asked to include atomic composition of the chair, and the chemical composition, and what the chair looks like from 10,000x magnification, from every possible vantage point and view. Pretty unreasonable.
So how does this relate to your question? Objective morality is useful in some contexts, but an unnecessary burden of proof in others, depending on what you’re trying to understand or apply those principles to. To answer this question you need to apply context. The question itself, while I do believe it is interesting, and enjoyed answering is unreasonable.

The word “objective” is problematic for me in this context. The dictionary definition talks of being “not influenced by personal feelings or opinions” - in relation specifically to facts. 1) Morality is not served by being viewed as any kind of fact 2) It is entirely a feeling . We often forget there are two kinds. Emotions (w/o which enjoyment of any kind is impossible) & intuition (where virtually all wisdom derives). Intuition & its treasures of insight & wisdom are the gateway to understanding our emotions (not just feeling them) & then we can understand what’s moral. “Facts” are artificial little prisons that do not help us quantify & define the feelings that help us understand the truth, of what we feel or whats moral. The calculating part of the conscious mind is not flexible or subtle enough. The unconscious is where we process all our deepest wisdom, genius, intuition etc. Then it hands it over to the conscious for it to process. Its a dance between the two. None of which is unduly pedantic or trivial. W/O our intuitive based wisdom there is no perception or application of morality. How do you take it out of the theoretical & do such a thing? Well let’s look at the the principle at the heart of all psychology: The ability to spot your emotions coming up & deal with them. You are then self aware & not reacting unthinkingly. You are then capable of much more genuine morality as I detail below.
Let’s redefine “objective” first. Truth or truthful works for me.
The primary way to arrive at truthful morality is to understand its source.
It is nether a social or psychological construct.
It is verifiably biological, grounded in our ability to empathize.
This is a widely accepted truth. The harm or good being done to another & then felt by the empathizer can thus be felt - & that is principally the basis for all morality.
I would add this to truly deepen & extend our understanding of moral action. There was once a documentary that asked a variety of people chosen randomly on the street, mixed in with celebrities: “The Beatles line, All you need is Love - is it true?”. A variety of answers ensued from yes to no & much in between, but what it took me a long while of pondering to arrive at is - Absolutely nothing we do has any worth whatsoever, unless it has a component of love. What really drives the truth of this home for me is the further realization that many crucial things are substantially composed of Love that had not initially occurred to me - & no doubt others. Integrity, honesty, dedication, true sincerity & courage to name some. The last one, courage is the something crucially soulful that says to the body: “You may get hurt or even die doing a thing that is nevertheless so crucial to a higher good, it still must be done”. There are different kinds of love, romantic being the most confusing, combining physical, emotional & spiritual in volatile ways, but for our purposes here the spiritual predominates - which is mostly what compassion, dedication, integrity & similar are composed of. Emotions are designed to support the process but they can sometimes have a life of their own i.e. the complications of romantic passion.
It isn’t always easy to be moral with absolute purity - but that’s what life lessons are for, to strive nevertheless. If it doesn’t cost you something then how valuable could it possibly be?

Morality is arguably the most subjective field of study.
The definition of “subjective” relates to personal feelings and opinions. And the fact that there are so many varying morals and principles that are expressed in this world only strengthens the fact that morality is purely subjective.
So, how do we go about making decisions that may positively or negatively (again subjective) affect others when morality itself is so eclectic?
Well, you create rules. Laws founded on “basic principles”, Christian/Western morals. The ideas that have been drilled into our heads from childhood:
Do not believe in any other gods,
do not make yourself a graven image,
do not take the name of the Lord in vain,
do not kill,
do not commit adultery,
do not steal,
do not lie,
do not desire what you don’t have.
Morality is a product of society. Now on top of the country’s laws and the Christian morals, we have morals in society and morals from different religions mixed in as well.
Do not judge,
do not gossip,
do not vandalize,
do not disrespect,
do not be impatient,
do not be selfish,
Are these morals correct? To me, not necessarily. I know murder is wrong. But how do I justify that I should not kill the guy who punches me at a club? Is it because killing is negative? Killing will hurt his family? The words “wrong”, “negative” and “hurt” themselves are subjective. So to determine whether killing (or any other act) is morally justified will lead you down a recursive spiral that you will struggle to escape.
Can you objectively argue that Charles Manson was indeed evil? If Marilyn Manroe’s beauty is subjective, so is Charles Manson’s morality.
So I don’t know if killing is bad because I have a feeling that it is bad, something empirical. Or maybe it is because it has been drilled into my head since I was a child through my parents, friends, film, music, literature, art, media, etc.
The only objective thing about morality is that it is subjective. But I bet even that statement can be argued.

No, there are no objective morals. There are actions that seem to be moral or immoral, but could easily be twisted to be the opposite, based on additional information.
Take the acts of theft or murder. Stealing is wrong, but what if you’re stealing a loaf of bread that would have been thrown out to feed a starving family? Murder is wrong, but what if that person was preparing a school shooting?
Conversely, imagine you have the cure for a disease, and used it to save someone’s life, but don’t tell them that they’ll live in constant agony after you use it on them if they don’t follow your commands.
The only way to ensure it’s an objective moral is to reach the same outcome regardless of situation. As there are different situations that lead to an action deemed moral or immoral, then they can’t be considered objective.

Generally, in philosophy, those who believe that morals are normatively ‘relative’ are subjectivists, and those who think they are universal are objectivists about ethics.
Subjectivists believe that moral claims are only expressions of the attitude of the person or society that claims them to be true - they are not true independently.
Objectivists (or moral realists) believe that moral claims can be ‘factually’ right or wrong, completely independently of what people think or feel.
In that sense, subjectivists cannot argue that someone did something ‘wrong’. They can only say that they or their society considers it wrong. Reductio ad absurdum; a subjectivist thinks that committing genocide is not actually ‘wrong’, it is just socially unacceptable to most people.
Objectivists can say that genocide is wrong, even if all of society thinks it is acceptable. But the issue is: how do we know which actions are wrong when people disagree? Philosophers have come up with theories such as Virtue Ethics, Deontology, and Utilitarianism, which create frameworks for ethical judgements. But philosophers today are surprisingly evenly split between the three main theories.
This is a long and old debate and it has created a field within moral philosophy called ‘metaethics’. In their own way, both main positions seem hard to accept. Philosophy is not done investigating this.

No. Morality does not exist. It’s simply a constituent of our bubble of belief. What is morality!?! An imaginary line drawn by the people on higher chairs to “help” us differentiate good from bad or right from wrong. People relate empathy to morality. Empathy in people arises either because they expect a divine intervention or are afraid that their god might not cancel their reservation in heaven. But mostly because we are brought up in an environment where it’s taught to be compassionate and sympathetic towards people. 
In other words, society’s guidelines to live a “moral life” hardwired our brains to have these emotions. Nature does not works around the morality clause. Morality is a deadly aspect to keep when you are out in the open where the only rule that seems to works is; stronger shall survive and weaker must perish.

To me it’s not reasonable to assume anything unless you’re willing to test your assumptions and discover for yourself whether there is anything real to them or not.
Do you want to assume an objective morality in your mind or discover it through direct experience?
The problem most people have in considering objective morality is they try to approach it intellectually or they hold to some ideas they grew up believing with blind faith.
Is there some sort of system or code of behavior that could be is applicable to all people in all situations and always leads to the best outcomes?
Well no, there is no such morality or ethics at the level of codified behavior that you could learn intellectually that’s sophisticated enough to cover all bases.
Every attempt at this has failed or is at the least no longer relevant or helpful.
So then either objective morality doesn’t exist or it exists beyond the intellect’s grasp.
The latter is proving itself to be true more and more in my experience.
And I’m not talking about biological instincts or bodily emotions.
There is something deeper within us and you don’t need to be conventionally religious in the slightest to know what I’m talking about.
Hasn’t there been a time in your life when you did something, usually for others, that you couldn’t really explain why but afterwards and even during it you felt that there was something deeply right about what you did?
Some claim there are biological, evolutionary reasons for these altruistic moments but to me that’s someone with a hammer looking for a nail, or someone attempting to fit the mystery of life into a neat little box.
Could there not be a greater order to life beyond what we can perceive with our physical senses and our instruments tied to them?
Do you not have an awareness of this?
And if there is intelligent life not only in our one world, but in billions of worlds across the galaxy and universe, life so different from us… how then could a few human ideas constitute a morality that holds true across a whole universe of diverse intelligent life?
It becomes like a joke.
That is why I see true morality as having a fundamental Source that is beyond this world and beyond the physical universe. You can call it God but if that word bothers you substitute something else.
If you truly seek to know if there is objective morality or not, then to my mind you will have to confront your relationship with God, with all Life, beyond the realm of ideas and concepts.
I want to share with you an excerpt from what’s called the New Message from God that touches on morality and I believe is very relevant to your question.
Again, you don’t have to believe in God to gain benefit from this. And if you do believe, your beliefs about God may be challenged. I think it’s very appropriate that a New Message from God would do so.
Here the term Greater Community refers to all intelligent life in the universe and Knowledge refers to the deeper spiritual intelligence, the moral foundation that God has put within all intelligent life (What is God? - The New Message from God):
In the Greater Community, God is Knowledge. In the Greater Community, God is experience. In the Greater Community, God is the communication of profound insight and recognition from one to another, permeating all manifest life. This comes into being in the realm of your experience.
God seems like different things to different people and to different races of beings in the Greater Community, but the essential experience that ignites the desire for God, the awareness of God and the relationship with God is the same everywhere. This religious impulse, the impulse towards union with God, is universal. Though it seems remarkably absent in some cultures and aberrantly expressed in others, the impulse is the same. What God is must be expressed in terms of your range of experience and your capacity for experience. In the Greater Community, God is so total and complete that any definition would always falter and fail.
Therefore, let us say that God is the experience of total relationship. You can experience this for a moment here and there and for longer periods should you prepare in The Way of Knowledge. This is an experience which can both be translated from one world to another and shared and demonstrated from one being to another, bypassing and transcending all divergences of race, culture, temperament and environment. This is God. God for you is God in action. God for you is an experience that is unlike any other experience in life, yet this experience gives meaning to all of your other experiences.
In the Greater Community, God is complete. In your world, God is a God of your world, a God of your race, a God of your history, a God of your temperament, a God of your fears and aspirations, a God of your great heroes, a God of your great tragedies, a God that is related to your tribe and your time. But in the Greater Community, God is so much greater, so complete—beyond the definitions of any race, beyond the history of any race, beyond the temperament, fears and aspirations of any race, beyond the grasp of any individual or collective philosophy. And yet, you find God in a pure impulse, in a timeless moment of recognition, in the desire to act beyond the sphere of your own personal interests and motives, in the recognition of another, in the motive to give, in the inexplicable experience of affinity. These are translatable. This is God in action. For you, this is God.
You must think of God now in the Greater Community—not a human God, not a God of your written history, not a God of your trials and tribulations, but a God for all time, for all races, for all dimensions, for those who are primitive and for those who are advanced, for those who think like you and for those who think so differently, for those who believe and for those for whom belief is inexplicable. This is God in the Greater Community. And this is where you must begin.
To believe in the God of the Greater Community is too great an attempt because you will realize that your race is small and the universe is great. Here you will be focusing on a God not of your world and of your time but a God of all worlds and all times. What kind of theology or philosophy can embody a God of this magnitude? What kind of human speculation and human ethics can encompass a God so complete as this?
Yet your theology of God must be the theology of God’s work in this world. And if it is true, accurate and beneficial, it must focus on the experience of Knowledge. Knowledge is the beginning of religion. Knowledge is the completion of religion. Knowledge is the evidence of God and the evidence that you are a part of a greater life beyond the limits of your time, beyond the boundaries of your race and beyond the confines of your present intellectual ability. Here there is no creation story. There are no heroes. There is no end of time. There is only the total experience of relationship, which is the experience of Knowledge and the experience of God.
What is a human religion without a creation story, without a hero to worship and without a culmination of human experience? What human religion can focus on a God of this magnitude, whose sole interest is not your world alone, whose sole concern is not your daily experience, whose awareness is so complete and whose beneficence blesses those who are so unlike you? What then is the model for human behavior? What is the basis for ethics or morality in a God of the Greater Community? For this you must venture beyond a childhood religion and a child’s needs. You must venture beyond the need only for rules and regulations and fantastic stories that are barely believable. You must enter into the experience and the Mystery of life, which is the doorway to God, which is at the very heart of your life and contains the very purpose for your coming here that is unique to you but which you share with all life.

The difference between an objective moral and a subjective one, is that an objective moral is always true, in that, there are no scenarios that change its applicability.
A subjective moral is one that depends upon the circumstances…essentially requiring judgement to determine right from wrong.
So, not killing SOUNDS objective, but, we generally agree its OK for a cop to kill a shooter spraying a crowd with machine gun fire, or a soldier to kill the enemy, etc…making it subjective.
Not stealing sounds objective, but, if you are captured and held against your will, and being starved, and steal some bread from your captor…is that morally wrong?
And so forth. Its hard to find examples of truly objective morals.
“Be Fair” or “Be Kind” might be an objective morals….but fairness or kindness, for example, are subjective, and so forth.
So, for a moral to be able to work without requiring context or judgement, is elusive. and, societies will simply disagree upon what is right and wrong based upon geographical and societal mores.
A good example might be asking if its immoral for a grown man to walk around with his genitalia exposed in public, in front of children.
If the man is in the Amazon (The Jungle), no one would consider it as even notable let alone wrong to do.
If the man is in Amazon (The Store), typically, everyone would consider it to be very wrong, and, typically, he’d be arrested, etc.
What is different about his genitals in the Amazon, that kept it from being immoral to allow them to be viewed in public?
Nothing….all that changed was the context.
Societal mores in the Amazon are simply different than at Amazon…and the same act is not immoral, or, is immoral, depending upon the context.
In the American West, for native americans, stealing horses was about the same as beating someone in a sport…not a moral issue at all. It was simply a thing you did to get horses.
When the settlers arrived, stealing a horse was a giant crime, punishable by death (Hanging typically). Stealing a HORSE was very immoral and a killing offense, but, stealing a wagon was not as bad, etc.
To the native americans, “stealing” was not how they viewed getting your horse…so when you hang one for doing it, the native americans are freeked out by the hugely disproportional reaction…and cannot even see the two actions as possibly connected.
So, taking your horse is mere sport to one, and a grave sin to the other…yet, the act of taking a horse is not changing, just the context.

First, I think it is important not to be too black-and-white.  Think of "objective" and "subjective" as being at either ends of a spectrum.  Most things will fall somewhere in the middle.  There are certain things that are more subjective or more objective but unless you believe in a particular religion no moral ideas are absolutely objective. 
Perhaps the easiest example is murder.  Let's make it even easier and say murdering a helpless child  You'd be hard-pressed to find a society out there that doesn't condemn such an act.  So for all intents and purposes you can say it is objectively, categorically wrong to murder an innocent child.  But is there some law of nature out there commanding this as a rule?  No.  And if some society out there decided that it was okay to murder children could you objectively prove them wrong?  I'm not sure but I lean towards no. 
Now let's make things a little more complicated.  The answer above took place in a vacuum.  Now let's apply a real-world idea.  Human beings are a species, and there are certain things that are biologically hard-wired into any species.  For example, the predisposition towards the proliferation of the species.  Basically, all species want to see the continuation of the species.  I'm no scientist but I would bet that is a hard, objective principle.  So apply this idea to the previous example of murdering a child.  Is it objectively wrong in a vacuum? No.  But if a species, group, society, etc. has a hard predisposition to continue existing then murdering your offspring goes directly against that predisposed principle.  So yes, in this world it is objectively wrong to murder an innocent child that poses zero harm, right?
Now let's add another twist.  That innocent child has a highly infectious disease that could wipe out the society.  Or maybe a village has ten babies and only enough food to ensure the survival of nine.  Now is it okay to murder a child?  You could make a case for either. 
See where I'm going with this?  I think there is an exception to every rule or principle out there.  Even if that exception is so crazy that it only happens once in a thousand years, it is still a small chip in the objectivity of that rule that prevents the rule from being 100% objectively right or wrong.  In the end, I think that some things might be 99.999% objectively right or wrong.  But absolutely, completely, 100%?  I would lean towards saying no. 

Aha! This question depends on whether the reader is religious or not. If you're religious, morality comes from your chosen deity and their teachings. If you're not religious, then the construct of objective morality comes from a society's realization that its beneficial to be honest and not murder your neighbor for his car. If you want a more detailed explanation, read An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morality by David Hume. He can go into much more depth than I can.

The short answer is "Yes, objective morality does exist." The problem with human beings defining it, is that bias is introduced. Only a transcendent source outside of humanity would necessarily author it. Without going into the involved discussion supporting the idea that Naturalism is logically irrational, it means a transcendent being must be that source... Happy to elaborate off-line, if you're interested.

I would suggest the following:
Any coherent objective moral system will be distinguishable from a system of mere recommendations by (at minimum) objective obligation. If there is no such objective obligation, at best you have is a system of recommendations, devoid of obligatory weight.
I have yet to see a coherent notion of objective obligation that can ground an objective moral system.
I must therefore conclude that there is no objective morality.
Other factors that bring objective morality into question include the following:
Can there be an objective system of morality where those considered "immoral" if breaking its rules do not have sufficient knowledge and understanding of those rules?
Is the tight convergence between the socially constructed emotional dispositions of a group of humans and its choice of moral systems 1) merely coincidental and that there is a legitimate objective moral system that transcends emotional dispositions, or 2) an indication that what they are calling "morality" is simply an artifactual rough facade of rules cobbled together to approximate the group's socially constructed emotional disposition? And is this argument not strengthened when we find competing systems of morality in cultures of different emotional dispositions?
Would not a coherent moral system provide legitimate and clear answers in all scenarios that those who have adopted the system would classify as moral scenarios? The following are just a few example scenarios:
Allowing two starving neighbor children to die to save one of your own
Honoring the wishes of dead relatives by forfeiting the well-being of the living
Mandatory organ donation by those killed in accidents
Corporate punishment for children in high-risk contexts where disobedience often leads to death
Lying to suicidal or terminally ill individuals so they can die happy
Granting mentally ill people the right to marry
Taking a job at a harmful company to reduce its harm

Yes, of course. The only life based morality is the only objective morality is the morality outlined in the Bible.
Objective can mean different things depending upon the viewpoint of the viewer, but sorta means perceivable externally, outside of the mind of the perceiver, but how do you perceive without your mind?
It looks like many claim to do that when they say they believe in evolution, and that it is an objective credulity they engage in, calling it a science although there is no evidence and it cannot be duplicated.
The morality lined out in the Bible is objective, rational, and reality based with good life for all as its objective. The best, most beneficial way for humans to interrelate is given in a written format easy for anyone to understand, and following it brings the greatest happinesses of any code of conduct.
The Bible has the only true morality that proceeds from our Source of Life. All other “moralities” cannot compare to the superior standards of our Creator, Jehovah God, who is perfect in every way. How can anyone advise Him?

All morality is objective because ‘subjective morality’ is a contradiction in terms and so inconceivable like ‘immortal man… And it came from the law of freedom whose we are self conscious subjects, because you know, you must die, and you can just go around asking people whether they know this, I recommend ‘agnostics’ because they are the most fun, just wait for it till they say problablility before you start laughing — or as they like to say in philosophy “the principle, first cause, reason, background, asshole etc, always was always will be, necessary eternally ie, so long as there is time, as time exist, as time it gives and he gives it, namely being, existence etc, but this you can just ignore because philosophers are known to talk a lot of nonsense which you know — which means you cannot escape its effect on you, which is your death, simply because it is necessary, and you may be thinking, oh no, objective law, here comes God… But don't and instead just go back to see how this ‘law’ was derived and that it is nothing beyond the necessity given or assumed through the idea of possibility itself, like when you think about something about something rather than just about the thing itself, so kind of like properties: and so a certainty you arrive at simply through your own thought, but look that is Descartes!— you just basically figured out Descartes with a single question, congratulations!
Let’s start with what is rather than what should be: moral senses are an evolved trait that we can see in simpler form in animals like rats, monkeys, chimps and dogs. Brain scans when thinking about ethical problems shows we use two brain areas that can conflict; people with injury to one show predictable outcomes when making ethical choices based on the brain area used. People who find maggot-covered meat more disgusting also will say that homosexuality is immoral, too.
Philosophers have tried, without success, to come up with an all-inclusive articulated set of principals to decide all ethical issues. Since the brain has competing decision-making processes at work in thinking about ethics, this can’t be done. The utilitarian-type rationality occurs in one brain area; the more intuitive natural-rights type thinking occurs in another. Google the “Trolley Hypothetical” and “sociopaths” and “brain scans” for studies and you will see that the philosophical tradition occurred before brain scans could show how we actually make ethical decisions.
All philosophical systems have shortcomings that cannot be overcome; as Godel showed with arithmetic logic systems must import some values from somewhere outside themselves. As ethicists say “You can’t get ought from is”. Thus there will always be disagreement.

Just so happens I was recently viewing a video of a lecture about the great scientist Vladimir Vernadski [known mostly as biogeochemist] ( and also, those who have followed in his footsteps, and some of whose writings I had previously encountered. Overly briefly. Vernadski laid out the criterion for “evolution,” generally and also of progress of humanity/personhood/morality in our case. [And, No, he was not a reductivist.] To shamelessly reduce his position to a couple of sentences: a population is virtuous if it is systemically increasing its potential population density and vicious in the contrary case. (These matters involve, of course, deliberation and knowledge of the pertinent factors and the intension to improve ourselves.). Let this stand —at least for now—like a movie trailer inviting the reader (in this case) as an inducement to become familiar with Vernadski and a relation of physical science and morality.
Most of us humans make moral decisions balancing much the same assortment of moral values. We come with inklings of much the same moral values, such as inklings to act fairly, spread happiness, keep the peace, keep promises, care for people closest to us, and punish wrongdoers, and not to lie, harm people, violate communal rules, and use people just for our ends.
So, we may refer objectively to standards of behavior that reinforce those values. Such standards work roughly in any culture at any time in human history.
Where subjectivity emerges is in the priority different people and cultures place on those values. Some feel that acting fairly is uppermost, trumping all others. Others place at the top any of the other moral values.
However, though many of us can identify our moral standards, we don’t use them. In a dilemma, a situation forcing us to violate one moral value for another, our brains go into an extraordinarily complicated sifting of our moral values until one emerges and trumps the other.
Sometimes instantly, we decide to lie to protect a loved one, to give up keeping the peace to enforce fairness, to ignore our inclination to punish a wrong-doer to active her own moral values, and so on.
Objective or subjective, our moral standards just don’t apply.

unless you subscribe to a deity.
Humans being fallible cannot determine objective morality.
This can be found through definition loops or infinite regress.
Try this out, ask someone why you shouldnt kill.
Then, keep asking why each time they try to justify.
You will default them to subjective preference.
If not, tell me, I've been very interested in this for a long time and never has someone given non-subjective justification.

It is objective morality that allows us to criticize someone else’s actions. This is what we mean by the broad concept of right and wrong.
If we don’t have objective morality or right and wrong, then all we have are preferences for how other people should behave. That puts murder at the same level as “I would prefer that you wash the dishes after cooking dinner.”
Some people will propose various forms of consequentialism and utilitarianism as valid, “non-objective” forms of ethics. Unfortunately, we still need to agree on what is good and bad, at least in terms of “direction”. Is happiness good? It certainly needs to be and objectively so for those frameworks to make any sense.
On the other hand, we recognize that there is a subjective and personal element to morality. This doesn’t eliminate the possibility of objective morality. It might make it harder to understand.

All human morality is objective from the point of view of the adherents. If one does not believe in a higher power, then logic dictates behavior based on ones best interest “whatever fill good, do it”.
If one believes in a higher power, then seeking “truth” or the “higher power” is mission critical. Examining historical human understanding requires reading what other have said. To date only one person know to exist by multiple writings of non believers is know to claim deity, that is the person of Jesus (the Christ). Examining his sayings leads one to an understanding that is completely alien to “religious” practice, in the sense that the view Jesus proclaimed led to his most loyal adherents being murdered by the powers that be, yet the number of adherents grew to today being the largest group of believers on earth, and those nations started by his adherents control by far the majority of the planets resources and military might.

Well, nothing in the mind of a human being is really objective.
Right and wrong and good and evil exist if what you're talking about is the impact they have.
Humans hurt each other because that's what we tend to do to people we believe are hurting us, and, foolish creatures as we are, we sometimes blame other humans for negative things in our life; things they may or may not be responsible for, and if the former, are not aware are causing harm. This is a thing living things have done forever: fight or flee from things that hurt them.
Humans feel good about helping each other because it's a good trait for a species to have to avoid being wiped out; individual humans who sacrifice themselves for the sake of others may get removed from the gene pool (if they haven't already procreated), but the willingness is a desirable trait. Being hesitant to hurt or kill others of our own species is great for not thinning our own population to the point of endangerment, though we do have a habit of killing each other a lot.
But there's no such thing as objective morality, because all morality, whatever end it has, has to have an end, and what that purpose is is subject to opinion.

No. Morality is always subjectively determined. Even to look for objectively determined morality is subjective because it is sought, it is interpreted as and qualified subjectively as being “objective” (this is a mistake). To look for such objective morality also results in an is/ought fallacy. Just because something is a certain way, as existing objectively and prior to subjective intention, does not mean that it is what should be. Ought is always a matter of preference, and desire.

I think that everybody else is answering the question, “Does objective ethics exist.” I can’t criticize them for it because ethics and morals are commonly used as synonymous. But I think there’s important distinction that should be made, which I can sum up as: “Morality is living up to your own values.” “Ethics are societies rules for how to interact with other people.” With that distinction, morals are not objective. They are private and subjective. A serial killer could be moral. Ethics though can be objectively better on worse, measured by how they result in the values of people in the society are satisfied. Those people’s values will be better satisfied if serial killers are caught and incarcerated or executed. So ethics is a kind of statistical measure over all the individual values. Morals are just measured against each persons values.
It seems to me this question helps to form a triumvirate of the hard philosophical questions. The other two are consciousness (qualia) and free will. In all three cases, our intuitions are strong, and counter to our more rational conceptions. Consciousness, free will, and objective morality somehow seem like they must exist, yet we can't conceive how they possibly can exist.
For what it's worth, Wikipedia says: Moral realism ... claims: Ethical sentences express propositions.
Some such propositions are true.
Those propositions are made true by objective features of the world, independent of subjective opinion.
And that: One study found that [twice as many] philosophers accept or lean towards  moral realism as accept or lean towards moral anti-realism.
I think there are moral facts, or at least I want that to be true. But don't ask me what they are.
