The word Ethics has been derived from the Greek adjective “ethos”, which comes from “ethica”— which means custom, habits or usages.
Literally: The term ethics mean the science of customs and habits of men. It is the science of habitual conduct of man.
Ethics is science because it depends upon the observation, classification and explaination of human conduct. But it is normative science. Which means it only prescribes, what we ought to do. Doesn't tell us the means to achieve moral life.
Ethics is the science of ideals of human life which are Truth, beauty and good.
Ethics is the science of human character expressed in right or wrong conduct.
Ethics is the science of rightness or wrongness in human actions.
Ethics is the science of higest good.
Ethics is the science of moral conduct of human being.
Ethics is the science of moral evaluation of voluntary actions.
So ethics is also called as Moral philosophy. Moral is derived from latin word “mores” - means customs or habits.
According to Mackenzie Ethics is “the science of what is right or good in human conduct” or “the science of ideals involved in human life”

In general, ethics is about what you should or should not do. Saying that something is “unethical” basically means that it is seen as something one should not do. “Ethics” can be used more or less narrowly defined, however, so details follow.
Ethics as synonymous with morality
Ethics can often be more or less synonymous with “morality” or “morals”, in fact that is how I was taught when studying ethics in philosophy. Ethics/morality is about matters of right and wrong which are seen as being “objectively true” (not dependent on a convention). Let me explain…
There are many times we use the words “right and wrong” – such as to explain when something is right according to a set of rules in a game, right according to the law, or right according to etiquette. For instance, you could say that during a dinner at a certain place you are acting the right way if you do not burp openly. But that is a matter of etiquette, which means that the “right” behaviour can change when you change culture, time period, or just the members of the group that is gathered. Ethical/moral issues are generally considered to be about “objective” right and wrong – meaning that what is right and wrong is always so, and does not change. For instance, a common ethical/moral position is that it would be wrong to kill a person without a reason, regardless of which culture or place you are in. Or that it is unethical for companies to use child labour.
In this sense, ethics/morality is about judgments concerning what is universally/objectively (always and to all people) right and wrong. The type of right and wrong that does not depend on what authorities say – a dictator can change laws and etiquette, but cannot change what is ethical/morally right. So when a person says that something is ethically wrong/morally wrong, that person is saying that it should be ethically/morally wrong for everyone. Or at the very least, that person is expressing that they feel like it should be ethically/morally wrong for everyone, even if they are not recommending that everyone should feel the same way.
Given this meaning, when one person argues that a question is about ethics, there may be opposite views. Some see issues such as stem cell research as ethical issues because of religious beliefs, while others who do not hold these beliefs do not see the same ethical issues (but may have other issues). So even though a claim about something being ethically wrong means that the person who claims this believes this is the case, other people could have different views. This is because there are different views of what aspects count as moral/ethical aspects, with some claiming that only issues about fairness and not harming others are true, while others may claim that aspects such as following authorities or traditions are also about morality/ethics. (see psychological research on “Moral Foundations Theory” for example)
My personal experience is that the ground for claiming that one should not do something because it is unethical is usually a concern for others. Thus, ethical questions typically involve interactions between people (or other creatures/entities) and in these interactions some selfish or destructive behaviour would cause something bad to happen to somebody else. How this applies to religiously based ethics is another question.
The difference between ethics and morality
Often “ethics” is used to refer to codes of conduct or practical rules, such as talking about “business ethics”. Such use of ethics is about the practice of how people should act. Morality, on the other hand, is more about personal beliefs about how one should act and can be more abstract. The difference may vary, and some say that “morality” refer to beliefs held by individuals, while “ethics” concern practical behaviour and principles, which in turn can be based on personal moral beliefs. In practice this means that a person can be accused of being immoral, while companies are accused of acting unethically (for instance, if they cheat on taxes).
Ethics without the “objective” meaning
Some people seem to miss the difference between ethics and etiquette, and will refer to any sets of principles of how one should act as “ethical principles” even when these principles do not claim to be objective or universal in any sense. When people speak of “ethics” in this way, they should really just use expressions like “codes of conduct”, “informal rules” or “norms”.
Usages of “ethics”
“Ethics” can also refer to the philosophical study of ethics and morality.
“Business ethics” is a common usage, which often refers to commonly held principles of what kind of conduct is acceptable in a business setting and what is not.
Any group or gathering of people could potentially have a specific set of ethical principles, so that one could speak of “feminist ethics” or “work ethics”.

In my mind, ethics is the exercise of attempting to balance mutually incombatible but otherwise moral, legal or acceptable outcomes.
 
There are several different types of "right and wrong" - religion, law, economics, ettiquette, and so on.  In many cases, what is "right" in one system is somehow "wrong" in the other.  To take a simple example, it is clearly right to enforce the law.  it is also clearly right to forclose on a house when the person in possession defaults on the mortgage.  However, is is right to forclose on hundreds or thousands of homes when this will have an adverse effect not only on those people, but on society as a whole?  That is largely an ethical question and has no easy answer. if it has an answer at all.
I will point out another example that goes the other way.  A former politician takes a large amount of money from a businessman to promote the businessman's business in front of the former politicians colleagues (many of whom are current politicians).  There is nothing illegal about this, but somehow many people would feel it was wrong.  
Here's another one.  Your hosting a fancy dinner party and you invite someone who has never been to one before.  You serve chicken drumsticks as part of the main course and your guest picks one up in their hand.  What do you do?  There is no good answer - your guest has breached the rule of a fancy dinner party, but to call them out on it would also be a terrible breach of ettiquette.

Ethics is the aspect of philosophy concerned with the moral decision as to what is right or wrong. Morality is applied ethics. We are an interdependent species; therefore, a moral decision is one that serves others, whether or not it serves the individual; with the ultimate moral question being what is fair when the outcome serves others but not oneself. Although, altruistically serving others may be self-serving, since serving the collective good reflects positively on the person serving. Reciprocal altruism, or a reciprocity norm, is an evolutionary adaptive behavioral trait of social animals, and consists of the expectation that helping another will lead to obtaining needed help in the future.
Ethics is commonly considered to be “a subset of both morality and philosophy. It encompasses theory and is primarily process oriented. It is concerned with rational, systematic, critical and principled thinking regarding how one ought to live a moral life. Morality gives substance to ethics, and ethics gives clarity and justification to morality through analysis and application of ethical principles and theory.” (National-Louis University, 1995, unnumbered)
An ethical attitude is the “manner of acting, feeling, or thinking that shows one’s disposition, opinion, etc.” (Guralnik & Friend, 1968, p. 95) toward moral decisions of what is right or wrong. “Police Ethics encompass a broad range of behavior from interpersonal relations to outright criminal activity” (Hyams, 1990, pp. 40-41). As such, it is intertwined in the definition of corruption. This section will attempt to focus on philosophical aspects, while following sections discuss the specifics and ramifications of unethical acts.
Kleinig (1990) stated, "Police ethics is characterized by a particular focus rather than a particular set of values" (p. 3). In other words, the situational context within law enforcement may differ, but the underlying philosophy, or decision-making process, cannot vary from the culture represented. He further cites John Stewart Mill's description of an ethical decision maker as using his senses and mental abilities to first collect the information necessary, then to make the decision, and further to stay the course once the decision is made.
Spader (1994) paraphrased Plato: "All major legal issues are simultaneously ethical issues" (p. 100), and "justice" is "the act of giving each person his 'due'" (p. 83). Spader also stated, "[W]hether the ends justify the means is central to due process" (p. 83). This leads to the so-called “dirty hands” dilemma.
That is, on some occasions a public official may find that the only way he can do his job successfully, meet his official obligations, is to do something that, from the perspective of private life, would be morally unacceptable. (French, 1983/1992, pp. 243-244)
French (1983/1992) differentiates public obligations from private obligations by identifying the primary objective. Public obligations emphasize “the accomplishment of certain recognized ends, whereas ... private-sector obligations concern the way things are done and what particular things are done, and less with outcomes” (p. 251).
Kleinig (1996) pointed out that this dilemma was discussed early on, from ancient Greek tragedies to The Prince, and includes Sartre more recently. Plato wrote, “[W]e must discover who are best guardians ..., that they must do whatever they think at any time best for the city” (1935/1992, p. 93). Modern advocates of this point of view still believe that “anyone who would act up to a perfect standard of goodness in everything, must be ruined among so many who are not good. It is essential, therefore, for a Prince who desires to maintain his position, to have learned how to be other than good, and to use or not use his goodness as necessity requires.” (Machiavelli, 1910, p. 53)
A social and ethical phenomenon described by Pollock (1994) is the glorification of "strong" criminals vs. ridicule of "weak" moralists (e.g., public acclaim for Bonnie and Clyde), the antithesis of morality. Popular culture seems to project a similar justification for police who exceed their authority in pursuit of justice, as portrayed by the “Dirty Harry” character and many of a similar nature. …
However, Delattre (1994) also added “that illegal conduct in a specific case may or may not be excusable—and I believe that it could be—depending on the particulars, and even the minute details, of the case” (p. 212-213).
In The Ethics of Policing, Kleinig (1996), a recognized police ethics scholar, discussed the dirty hands concept at length. Two primary issues were raised by this concept. First, was the consideration that two alternative courses of action are in fact wrong. He argued that it would not be morally wrong to adhere to the law and therefore not seek a desirable outcome. And, secondly, if it is true that both actions are wrong, what should be done about the person who made a decision under those circumstances?
Kleinig (1996) wrote that Machiavelli advocated resignation or punishment for officials caught in such a situation. Kleinig stated that he has sought not to accept the premise of the necessity to commit a crime to thwart a crime, while acknowledging that it is accepted by others. But he still raised the issue of the public being placed in the position of punishing a person who performed a service that could be identified with the preservation of social order, thereby raising the dirty hands question for those who would inflict the punishment. …
Universalizability has to do with the “fundamental requirement of morality, as the activity of a rational being, that we act only on maxims that we could, without ‘contradiction,’ will to be universal laws” (Kleinig, 1996, p. 125). It would be impossible to rely on untruth as a universal law. In consequence, “Not only does the liar violate another’s being, but also his own” (p. 126).
More than one ethical system exists. Pollock and Becker (1995) identified five as a basis for comparison: utilitarianism, ethical formalism, religion, ethics of care, and natural law. Other ethical systems include prudence, pragmatism, contractarianism, normative rationalization, feminist ethics, and relativism. Devising dilemmas that could have differing results with the application of different theories does not seem out of the question.
Utilitarianism involves determining what alternative resolutions there may be, weighing the pros and cons of each, and then choosing "the one that would produce the most benefit or the least harm for everyone affected by the action" (Cederblom & Spohn, 1991, p. 205). Utilitarianism has also been described as "the greatest good for the greatest number" (Pollock & Becker, 1995, p. 18). This system presupposes that the "greatest good" and the "greatest number" will be evident.
Another system is ethical formalism: "What is good is what is pure in motive" (Pollock & Becker, 1995, p. 18). This can be more familiarly recognized as intent, an element of the majority of crimes. Consequence, under this system, is irrelevant. One could assume that reckless disregard for the welfare and safety of others may or may not be identifiable as intent, and may be a point for discussion amongst advocates who may differ in their adherence to the purest interpretation of this system.
Religious ethics ("what is good conforms to a deity's will") are also subject to differing interpretations by people within the same religion (Pollock & Becker, 1995, p. 18). However, there are similarities across many religions, such as The Golden Rule and versions of the Ten Commandments (Pollock, 1994).
The answer to ethical questions in the religious system is found through "conscience, ... religious authorities" and the "written word of God" (Pollock, 1994, p. 18). Pollock stated that significant historical events prove the weakness of reliance upon religion as a source for all ethical decisions.
The ethics of care can be defined as follows: "[W]hat is good is that which meets the needs of those involved and doesn't hurt relationships" (Pollock & Becker, 1995, p. 19). In a law enforcement context this means to "'solve problems' rather than merely 'enforce the law'" (p. 19). This system would be more concerned with rehabilitation than punishment. …
Natural law can be described by saying "what is good is what conforms to nature" (Pollock & Becker, 1995, p. 18). "Natural rights" as it appears in the United States Constitution, is derived from natural law, and the democratic freedoms are based upon the ideals of natural law (Fishman, 1994).
Self-preservation and therefore self-defense are natural, as is the need to rely upon others and therefore the prohibition of murder (Pollock, 1993). According to Fishman (1994), St. Thomas Aquinas argued that "the extent to which we are obliged to obey government is the extent to which governments fulfill the moral obligations imposed on them by the rational dictates of natural law" (p. 191).
Fishman (1994) claimed natural law to be the foundation for ethical decisions "on discretion and moral judgment that classical and medieval political philosophy can contribute to criminal justice administration" (p.194).
Prudence combines experience and practicality with basic principles. It is striving for ethical perfection, but "accepting something less, although grudgingly, ... to keep justice alive in a world often subsumed by greed and power" (Fishman, 1994, p. 198). "Plato observed, and argued with great acuity, exemplifications of ideals fall short of perfection" (Kleinig, 1990, p. 2).
Pragmatism is the practice of the pragmatic method. “The pragmatic method ... is to try to interpret each notion by tracing its respective practical consequences” (James, 1907/1974, p. 42). James attributed the introduction of the pragmatic method to Charles Pierce in 1878.
“Mr. Pierce, after pointing out that our beliefs are really rules for action, said that, to develop a thought’s meaning, we need only determine what conduct it is fitted to produce: that conduct is for us its sole significance.” (James, 1907/1974, p. 43) …
Contractarianism indicates that "one's obligation is not to make people happy but to be fair" (Cederblom & Spohn, 1991, p. 206). Similarity to utilitarianism is evident.
Professor Alan Gewirth, a normative rationalist, has advocated the theory that a person must "act in accord with the rights of the recipient of his action," those rights being "freedom and well-being" (Wilson, 1994, p. 87). Wilson criticized Gewirth's reliance on rights, claiming that "for most of history moral philosophers never spoke of rights at all. But they spoke of character" (p. 88). Character was defined as "prudence, temperance, fortitude and justice" (p. 88).
As alluded to in the natural law discussion above, one can also draw upon classic philosophers for a base upon which to examine ethics. "Aristotle taught that if ethical theory is to be of practical use it must be focused on the reality of what is and what exists" (Souryal & Potts, 1993, p. 29). "As Holmes noted, abstract principles do not resolve concrete cases" (Spader, 1994, p. 82). A complicating factor is that change is constant. Heraclitus said that "'one cannot step into the same river twice, since it is endlessly flowing and changing'" (Souryal & Potts, 1993, p. 29).
Speaking further on ancient philosophers, Wilson (1994) raised a question he stated was apparently overlooked by Aristotle and Plato: What "is the extent to which we ought to grant strangers the moral status we assign to people in our own family" (p. 88)? However, a review of Aristotle’s work seems to answer this question.
“’Office will reveal the man’ is felt to be valid; because an official is eo ipso in relation to, and associated with, somebody else. And for this same reason—that it implies a relation to somebody else—justice is the only virtue that is regarded as someone else’s good, because it secures advantage for another person …. So the … best is not the one who exercises his virtue toward himself but the one who exercises it towards another; because this is a difficult task. Justice in this sense, then, is not a part of virtue but the whole of it, and the injustice contrary to it is not a part but the whole of vice.” (Aristotle, 1953/1976, p. 174)
Feminist ethics has been described as “an attempt to revise, reformulate, or rethink those aspects of traditional western ethics that depreciate or devalue women’s moral experience” (Tong, 1998, p. 1). Traditional Western ethics has been faulted for failing women in five ways: (a) women’s rights and interests are subordinated to those of men; (b) the care and sustenance traditionally provided by women are dismissed as morally uninteresting; (c) women are assumed to be less morally developed than men; (d) “it overvalues culturally masculine traits like independence, autonomy, separation, mind, reason, culture, transcendence, war, and death, and undervalues culturally feminine traits like interdependence, community, connection, body, emotion, nature, immanence, peace, and life” (p. 1); and, (e) “it favors culturally masculine ways of moral reasoning that emphasize rules, universality, and impartiality over feminine ways of moral reasoning that emphasize relationships, particularity, and partiality” (p. 1).
Feminist ethics do not stem from a monolithic ideological group, and therefore true consensus as to what constitutes the basic tenets of feminist ethics does not exist. Feminists run the gamut of political ideology (e.g., liberal, Marxist, radical, socialist, multicultural, global, existentialist, psychoanalytic, postmodern, cultural), but are often categorized under the headings of feminine, maternal, feminist, and lesbian. However, Tong (1998) cites Alison Jaggar’s contention that “all fully feminist approaches to ethics seek to (1) articulate moral critiques of actions and practices that perpetuate women’s subordination; (2) prescribe morally justifiable ways of resisting such actions and practices; (3) envision morally desirable alternatives for such actions and practices; and (4) take women’s moral experience seriously, though not uncritically.” (p. 16)
Chamberlin (1998) identified another ethical system, relativism, which has the following characteristics:
“What is good changes depending on the values and life circumstances of the individual or group.
What is bad is relative to the need and interests of the people engaged in the behavior in question.
Followers of this belief observe the actions of an individual and determine the group consequences on a given behavior. A positive consensus indicates that the action is right and ethical.
Judgements do not remain forever.
As circumstances change formerly accepted behavior changes and becomes unethical behavior.” (p. 136)
One of Kohlberg’s (1981) major themes was the fallacy of value relativism. Kohlberg used the bevaviorist B. F. Skinner’s teachings as an example:
“Good things are positive reinforcers. Physics and biology study things without reference to their values, but the reinforcing effects of things are the province of behavioral science, which, to the extent that it concerns itself with operant reinforcement, is a science of values. Things are good (positively reinforcing) presumably because of the contingencies of survival under which the species evolved. It is part of the genetic endowment called “human nature” to be reinforced in particular ways by particular things.... The effective reinforcers are matters of observation and no one can dispute them.” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 66)
Kohlberg (1981) wrote that Skinner equated positive reinforcement with good, which Kohlberg identified as fallacious. “The psychologist’s fallacy or the naturalistic fallacy is a fallacy because we can always ask the question ‘Why is that good?’” (p. 67). Skinner did not deal with this value judgment, which is what classifies this theory as relativism; there is no frame of reference for good or evil, there is only that which is good for a particular individual or culture, notwithstanding the effects on other persons or cultures.
Maslow (1971) stated that he was “convinced that the value-free, value-neutral, value-avoiding model of science that we inherited from physics, chemistry, and astronomy, where it was necessary and desirable to keep data clean and also to keep the church out of scientific affairs, is quite unsuitable for the study of life.” (p.5)
Maslow went on to state that such relativism “is not only wrong, but is dangerous as well” and provided the example of Nazism (p. 20), as did Kohlberg (1981).
Kohlberg (1981) devised a rather intricate moral judgment theory involving three levels, with one sub-level, and six stages extending through the levels. The progression through these levels is an individual matter, and attainment of the higher levels is not universal. The levels are A. preconventional, B. conventional (with a transitional sub-level), and C. postconventional and principled.
Level A, Stage 1: “Right is literal obedience to rules and authority, avoiding punishment, and not doing physical harm” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 409).
Stage 2: “Right is serving one’s own or other’s needs and making fair deals in terms of concrete exchange” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 409).
Level B, Stage 3: “The right is playing a good (nice) role, being concerned about the other people and their feelings, keeping loyalty and trust with partners, and being motivated to follow rules and expectations” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 410).
Stage 4: “The right is doing one’s duty in society, upholding the social order, and maintaining the welfare of society or the group” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 410).
Level B/C, Stage 4 ½: “[C]hoice is personal and subjective. It is based on emotions, conscience is seen as arbitrary and relative, as are ideas such as ‘duty’ and ‘morally right.’ ... One can pick and choose obligations, which are defined by particular societies, but one has no principles for such choice” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 411).
Level C, Stage 5: “The right is upholding the basic rights, values, and legal contracts of a society, even when they conflict with the concrete rules and laws of the group” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 411).
Stage 6: “This stage assumes guidance by universal ethical principles that all humanity should follow” (Kohlberg, 1981, p. 412). (Robb, 2001, pp.26-43)
Randian “objectivism” seems to deal with ethics as a necessity, a basic means of survival; and those who interfere with and prey upon others are judged evil. “It is not the degree of a man’s ability nor the scale of his work that is ethically relevant here, but the fullest and most purposeful use of his mind” (Rand, A. (1961). The virtue of selfishness, p. 39). Rand went on to indicate that moral ambivalence is unacceptable, and one is obligated to judge good from evil. Rand also accentuated the role of the individual to engage in self-preservation; which does not seem inconsistent with evolutionary psychology.
Evolutionary psychology is based on the premise that genetic predisposition is determined by what has proven beneficial over generations of humans and human predecessors (Shackelford, T. K. , & Duntley, J. D. (2008). Evolutionary forensic psychology. Duntley, J. D., & Shackelford, T. K. (Eds.). Evolutionary forensic psychology: Darwinian foundations of crime and law). Gazzaniga indicated that "we have thousands, if not millions, of wired-in predilections for various actions and choices" (Gazzaniga, M. S. (2011). Who’s in charge: Free will and the science of the brain, p. 44). Social conditioning over those generations has contributed to the determination of that genetic predisposition. Those whose traits are superior, or are judged superior by their social order are more likely to procreate (passing on their genes), with that judgement generally being based on having traits that are beneficial to the social order, or otherwise presenting superior physical, mental, and behavioral traits that enhanced survival.
Those of a species with traits less likely to facilitate procreation will have a tendency to eventually disappear or appear only in a lesser percentage of the population compared to the previous population from hundreds of thousands of years ago, or appear sporadically due to physiological or environmental influences (http://www.whatisepigenetics.com...).
It seems obvious that, as a whole, humans are genetically pre-disposed to be moral/altruistic, at least within groups we identify with

Start with a question: does ethic apply in the context of a true hermit? Would the last person on Earth have any ethics that ought to be lived up to?  I think there are religions where the answer to that is yes. But what if you don't believe in any of these religions? Is there a non-religious ethical dimension to a person living totally isolated from the rest of humanity?
My thinking is no. Ethics arises when 2 or more people are involved.  Which means that ethics is going to have to serve some purpose or function that the people involved want served.  In my view (and that's all it is), ethics is a word used to signify communication and transactions processes that build justifiable, mutual, sociable trust.
Justifiable - A believing B to be honorable while B is secretly stealing him blind means his trust is unjustified by the facts. Upon finding out, A knows that the outward ethics of B is  sham.
Mutual - If the only one benefiting from the ethical propositions is A, and if B comes to realize it, B may reasonably say that the communications and transactions are not benefiting him and so he will not be bound to the ethics.
Sociable - A may justifiably trust the communications and transactions. A may realize that he and B are, in fact, on a level playing field.  But if the relationship is not sociable, A will be looking over his shoulder and B will be looking over his. Both aiming to gain an advantage.
In my view, ethics is about building trust between the players in the field. The natural fields for humans are our societies. To the extent that the rules governing communications and transactions are justified, mutual and sociable, ethical behavior will tend to be supported and will likely be self-reinforcing.
I was thinking of adding another factor: rationality or workability. But these tend to be emergent and malleable over time and with changes in populations and technologies. So while they are important to the functioning of a society, I think they are more on the order of tools and are somewhat independent of ethics.

Ethics are set of moral principals which decide what is right or wrong, fair or unfair, just or unjust.
Broadly there are two source of ethics as Internal (drive by conscience) & External (set by society).
Conscience is internal voice of human being which constantly tell what is right or what is wrong. It mainly depends on the way the person is bought up. For example some parents tell sharing is good some tell its not.
Ethicality is relative, it varies from time to time and society to society. Historically, ethicality of human actions were decided based on religion standards by church & other institutions.
In recent time, Constitution of a country is the ultimate source or guide of ethics. Organisation has its code of ethics or code of conduct for its employees. Professionals like doctors, lawyers and charted accountants have professional governing bodies deciding ethicality of actions of members. Judiciary also decide ethicality, SC judgements on stray dogs, jalkattu, under trials and night shelters have broaden the ambit of expected ethical behavior.

Ethics is three things.
1. In ordinary language usage, ethics is a description of the principles used by an individual or a community (no matter how large or little or how defined) to arrive at right conduct or moral behavior. Because these principles often aren't codified or differ from the code when they are, they must be deduced and inferred--often the work of anthropologists or sociologists or biographers.
2. In philosophy, ethics is an entire branch of study, the study of right conduct and moral behavior so extensive that the Encyclopedia of Philosophy takes 69 large pages of fine print just to provide a skimming overview of the topic. And that's before you get into the scores of subtopics such as deontological ethics, value theory, morality and so on, or into the scores of philosophers who have offered their own ethical theories.
There is no Archimedean point from which one can gain unbiased perspective and commence an objective discourse into ethics, much as John Rawls may have tried with the related concept of justice. And you cannot begin with a set of postulates and have the body of content spool out logically as is possible in geometry and arithmetic. No, with ethics you are completely adrift in the sea of opinion, and that opinion is all over the map to the point that there is not a barbarity you can imagine that has not found justification in someone's scheme of ethics, especially now that we are dealing with postmodern philosophers. Stalin and Hitler had their favored philosophers of ethics.
3. As psychology (which has its own official ethical code) has increasingly entered into this topic realm, opinion has been infused with psychobabble and become a mainstay in pop culture with articles on everything from work ethics to feminist ethics to the sorry ethics of capitalists to cheating on your spouse to why we lie to how to get ahead in life to should I forgive my lousy boyfriend for bragging to all our friends we had sex. You can find a bunch of this right here on Quora.
For me this brings up a fourth thing that ethics is... millions and millions of words and ideas amounting to a nullity. If you want your own personal morality, reading texts won't begin to compare with reading your own heart to decide how you want to relate to others in this world. (And that's my ethics.)

Confusion on this subject all stems from the conflation of two different sorts of discussion:
1) Science - The study of the ways that agents (humans, animals, computers) have to cooperate, by theorizing, testing, researching, et cetera.
2) Politics - The ways that agents discuss and engage verbally in their own forms of cooperation, by praising, blaming, exhorting, etc.
All confusion in ethics can be avoided if you clearly distinguish which of these you are doing. Of course, all claims made in the second category of speech have their ultimate basis  in the statements of the first category. Of course many speech-acts in the second category have no basis at all and may even have no truth value at all since they are merely exhortations for one's political unit to cooperate, schism, attack, etc. But there is no reason that a group may come to exist in some future time for whom all political speecj-acts are reducible to some set of scientific statements.
For example if I say that "murder is wrong, x murdered y, therefore x is wrong". This is a true statement and is completely within category 2, but if we ask WHY murder is wrong at all, we must leave category 2 and go to category 1. At this point we shall have to explain modes of cooperation the same way we explain hair color, body shape, immune systems, et cetera, either by saying "God made it that way." or "That's the best Evolutionary Stable Strategy." or whatever.  And it's actually true that murder is not a good ESS; animals rarely every kill their own kind, and this can be explained using Evolutionary Game Theory. Most people who have not studied evolution have this idea that evolutions favors the wicked, but wickedness destroys itself in short order if it takes a dominant role in any context. It can only "dominate" on the fringes of a stable ecology or economy, and "goodness" is that which makes for the best long-term evolutionary outcome. Evolution actually favors the good over the long term, so never lose hope! 
"The arc of history is long, but it bends toward justice."-MLK.

As most people have already answered this question , I would try to relate it with different way of authority that we follow and the way we live.
Ethics has been derived from Greek word ethikos which means character is Essence of habit and value of people or group of people . It covers analysis and employment of good and evil, right and wrong.
The word moral in Latin means mos which means custom . Character and custom provide two different standard to define what is right and what is wrong , character is for individual while custom is for group of people , character is followed by people while custom is followed by society and to violate either of those would be immoral .
Morals are accepted from the authority of religion or culture , while ethics are personally accepted principles , for example - if one follows the authority of religion and that religion forbid stealing then stealing would be immoral in that religion.
Ethics is not same as feelings , feeling provide us important information on our ethical choices . Some people have highly developed feeling that make them feel bad when they are doing something wrong while other feel good though they are doing something wrong.
Ethics is not religion. Most people are irreligious but ethics applies to everyone . some religion are highly ethical and do advocate high ethical standard but religion forget to address all problems that we face.
Ethics is not a system of law , law can deviate from its objectives and become corrupt and blind as some totalitarian regimes have made it .
Ethics is not science , science provide us important information on our ethical choices, but science doesn't tell us what we ought to do
Ethics is not culturally accepted principles , some culture do advocate high ethical standard but become corrupt and blind under different circumstances as US was for slavery before civil war and when they dropped nuclear bomb on Hiroshima.

Ethics is a field of study within philosophy. Philosophers working on ethics try to answer questions such as: what is the right thing to do? What is good and evil? What does it mean to live a good life? There are three very famous ethical theories that propose to answer such questions: consequentialism (specially a form of consequentialism called utilitarianism), deontology and virtue ethics. 
Metaethics is a field closely related to ethics that tries to investigate the nature of ethical claims: are ethical claims relative? Are they objective? Is it possible to derive an 'ought' from an 'is'?
Practical ethics is the application of ethical theories to practical matters. Ethicists working on practical ethics write about the morality (or immorality) of such things as abortion, meat consumption, war, euthanasia and so on.
You can learn more about ethics, metaethics and practical ethics by reading James Rachel's book The Elements of Moral Philosophy. You can also find a large number of online resources, such as the The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy or the podcast series Philosophy Bites, which has many episodes about ethics.

There was a poet Bharathi from Tamilnadu, India and he said this : " Even if a single individual is to go without food, let us destroy the whole world!". 
For me, all my  ethics is based upon that idea.  He was angry at the world when he saw the human behavior. This was hundred years  ago and the human mentality is still the same even though lifestyles have improved a lot.  I think Bharathi was addressing the greed in human nature. If you are not greedy, you will most probably be ethical. But how do you define greed? In a free market world, there is no definition for greed. Its not a bad word at all.
Only when we realize that we did not inherit earth from our ancestors but rather we borrowed it from our children,  greed will get a correct definition and everybody will become ethical.  If you look around and try to consume less than the people around you, you are in the right path.  Consume less, accumulate only enough wealth, go around the world and experience various cultures. You will automatically become ethical!

Ethics is the study of the general nature of morals and of the specific moral choices to be made by a person. It is the study of moral philosophy. It is the study of the general nature of a set of sanctions and rules regarded as proper actions or reactions of persons or things in response to external or internal stimuli. It is any measurable response of an organism and of the specific moral choices to be made by a person with reference to standards of right and wrong. 
Behavior refers to the Rules or habits of conduct, with reference to standards of right and wrong. A moral code is a set of sanctions and rules regarded as proper behavior.
Behavior refers to the actions or reactions of persons or things in response to external or internal stimuli. It is any measurable response of an organism (Reber, 1995).
Morals. Rules or habits of conduct, with reference to standards of right and wrong. A moral code is a set of sanctions and rules regarded as proper behavior (Reber, 1995).

Morals are what you have been taught; so they are passed down from one generation to another. One person's morals may differ from another as parents taught differently. For example, if you are taught as a youngster that it is proper to steal from those that have to help those that don't have then your morals develop to aid the poor by robbing the richer ones. If you were taught that stealing is wrong then your morals would not allow you to aid the poor by robbing the richer ones.
Ethics is what you derive for yourself that is right and good and benefits all people involved, when you are living to the highest that you know and doing the most honorable thing. So, lets say you were taught not to steal. So you go into a bookstore and read a magazine while standing up, and left the magazine there when you left the store. Morally, you did nothing wrong as you did not steal the magazine. Ethically, this is wrong, as you read the magazine without paying for the information contained in the magazine and thereby deprived the store of one sale. Also, the magazine is technically not now new, as you read it, and so now the store is sellling a used magazine but charging the next customer a price for a new magazine. Ethically, you stole from the store and the person who ends up purchasing the magazine. So, morally it is not wrong, but ethically it is.

Morals are the internal (emphasis on internal) guidelines and principles that a person uses to justify doing or not doing an act.  Some people have more, some people have less.  Some people hold their morals to be sacrosanct, not changeable, and without compromise.  Others not so much; their morals are merely suggestions for certain behaviors, and flexible or changeable depending on the situation at hand. 
Ethics are the external (emphasis on external) guidelines and principles that a person uses to justify their actions.  Ethics are imposed on a member of society in a number of different ways.  Some of the easiest to identify are the laws and regulations that a society passes and chooses to enforce.  Others are not so easy to quantify, and come under the guise of tradition, peer pressure, childhood development, or other indoctrination (political/religious).    
A person can be true to their moral code, but still run fowl of society’s ethics.  Best example I can think of is Dexter.  The answer to whether a person’s morals or a person’s ethics are better is a very grey area.    
Ethics are society’s morals, and as such can be used as a barometer for whether society’s members will match your own moral compass.  This is why there is such friction over what are perceived to be changes in laws that govern a society.  It is essentially a fight between the differing morals of its various members to come to a consensus over whose morals will guide society’s ethics.  This fight comes in different forms dependent on the manner in which society has structured their ethical system.  For this topic I will concentrate on the ethical system of the United States which is structured in the manner of a republic. But keep in mind that there can be others such as a communist state, or dictatorship, or as many hybrid systems as can be devised by the imagination of man.  Also understand that there can be different ethical systems within a larger one. The system imposed at the national level can be different than that at a state level, which in turn can be different at the local level, and so forth, all the way down to a single individual. 
To give a current example of this fight is the determination of who can marry whom.  For a certain percentage of the population the moral imperative is that only a man and a woman can be married.  This comes from a long history or tradition, religious, and to a certain extent peer pressure within the same group.  Others feel that marriage can be between same-sex members, and while this view is the view of the minority, the manner in which the U.S. has their ethical system structured has allowed this to take precedence over the majority opinion.  The system of the U.S. has developed in such a way that a minority can impose a change in the ethics of an entire society, and at the same time allow the majority to accept this change in societal ethics while still keeping true to their own internal morals.  This methodology of imposing minority ethics on the majority does not necessarily mean that the majority changes their own morals.  It simply means that the majority will impose their morals at a more local level using local laws, or under a neighborhood or family level with the use of peer pressure and indoctrination. 
However, in the case of the ethical system of the U.S., when ethics on any level is changed, it will slowly change the ethics of other levels as well.  In this case, the society’s ethics are being changed through law on a state by state basis.  Eventually, this will reach a critical point, and change will be enacted at on the federal level, and probably on a local level as well, just at a slower pace.  This is probably why both sides are passionate about ensuring that ethical changes do or do not occur.  The speed by which society’s ethics changes is determined by how quickly a society member’s morals changes.

Ethics relates to what is good or bad with moral duties and obligations.
The word "Ethics" is derived from the Greek word "Ethos" refers "character" is a personal attribute.
Ethics are adopted or absorbed by an individual gradually by taking reasonable decisions in appropriate situations.
Ethics come from social system i,e (External).
Ethics are accepted because in society it is right thing to do.
Ethics are much wider in scope. It examines the moral standards of a group or society to determine whether these standards are reasonable or unreasonable in concrete situation.
Ethical norms are comparatively abstract. It cannot be described in general rules and statements.
Moral relates to the principle of right or wrong.
The word "Moral" is derived from the Latin word "Mos" means custom. It is an attribute of a group of society.
Morals are adopted due to an authority which may be religious or cultural.
Morals come from individual i.e (Internal).
Morals are accepted because we believe in something being right or wrong.
Morals are in smaller scope than ethics. Addresses human need for belonging and emulation.
Moral norms are usually expressed as general rules and statements. Eg. “always tell the truth."

Morality is one word, but has a million shades. Morality is not white or black; it has millions of shades in between. There are many universal values - values that are loved and respected all over the world. For example, truth, kindness, sincerity, honesty, compassion, loyalty, and so on. Ability to express true morality in life depends upon how much we are able to understand each of these universal values, their mutual relationships, when to give preference to which one, why these values are considered so important as to deem them universal, etc.Some times truth takes precedence, and at other times kindness, or love for life overrides truth.
I have heard a story which brings this out so beautifully. Once a brahmin spiritual seeker used to live in a hermitage in the forest. He used to do severe penance to attain Self-realization. One day, a mob came running to the hermitage pursuing a man. The mob was hell bent upon killing this man. The man reached the hermitage a few minutes before the crowd and hid himself behind a bush. The brahmin saw him hiding. After a short while the mob arrived on the scene and asked the brahmin if he had seen a man who came running this way. If yes, where is he hiding. This brahmin was devoted completely to an ethical way of life, and truth was for him the ultimate value. He revealed the place of hiding of that man without wasting even a second. That man was discovered and lynched by that mob.The question here is whether what the brahmin did is a moral act or immoral?
The story continues further. This brahmin died a very old man. He searched for God intensely but could not find Him. After his death, his soul was taken before Yama, the God of death. Yama sent him to the deepest hell for a thousand years.This brahmin was shell shocked. In his mind, he considered himself an epitome of morality. He had never expected such a fate. He asked the God of death what was his sin that he was being given such a drastic punishment. The God replied that you are responsible for the most heinous crime of killing a helpless man. So, you deserve this punishment which is reserved for the most wicked souls.
The moral of the story is that we need to understand and practice all the values and not only one of them. We need to understand how these values interact with one another. Often, speaking the truth and nothing but the absolute truth is neither wise nor kind. This was the failing of the brahmin in the story - inability to prioritize kindness and love for life over truthfulness when it was necessary to do so.
What is true for truthfulness as a value - that it is not to be followed absolutely - is true for other values too. We cannot and should not behave kindly towards a gross perpetrator of injustice. Doing so may make the perpetrator more bold in practicing an evil way of life. That would be harmful for his own soul as well as to the practice of Dharma in collective social life. This is was one of the main things that Krishna taught to Arjuna through the Srimad Bhagavad Gita.
So, where morality is having respect for these universal values, ethics is how we express these values in our actual behaviour. To be able to behave ethically or even appropriately across different situations we need a proper practical understanding of all these universal values and express them appropriately weighing the pros and cons of our actions very carefully. I hope this clarifies the relationship between values, morality and ethics to at least some extent.

Morality comes from a personal conscience or God, and ethics comes from society, so they are actually quite different in source from each other though many confuse the two and think they are similar.
Morals can influence ethics but ethics will never influence morals, for morals is a deeper knowledge of right and wrong, an objective truth which is universal and the same regardless of people, culture, history or any other physical changes. Morals usually deal with principles and a much larger picture than ethics. Morals are related to bigger decisions such as life related decisions, freedom of choice, long-term term consequences, and a bigger picture related to purpose of life and motivation.
Ethics are far more simple and practical and likely to change. Ethics do not so much deal with bigger question or principles, but rather with social behavior, culture, success and relationships with short-term consequences in mind. Ethics is about what is right and wrong in society and will deal with issues such as taboos, reputation, laws, customs, status and society.
Morals go far broader and also influence choice, consequences on the planet and other species, and morals even deal with thoughts, values and priorities with the heart in mind; ethics do not and is mostly concerned with actions and feelings. Morals go beyond life, ethics do not. So with ethics you might justify doing something immoral to save your life, but morals have a spiritual implication and so do not see death as the ultimate evil.
All ethical questions are moral related but not all moral questions apply to ethics. For example racism is both unethical and immoral, but if you supported Nazism to survive in a Nazi Germany, you would violate morality and not ethics, but you would violate ethics but not morality if you took a canoe down a river which required a permit, or revealed government secrets to inform citizens and give them a choice of what to support.
Edward Snowden is a good example of someone who followed morality, but broke ethical codes to inform citizens about their privacy being invaded by CIA technology. Being naked in movies, fornicating, over eating, taking a job you know others are more qualified to take would violate morality but usually not ethics. So the two are related, but they are actually very different from each other in nature, source, values and how to determine right from wrong.
The Bible gives many such examples. Like Jesus who was killed for blasphemy for violating ethics, while doing nothing morally wrong. The Pharisees who were religious people with good social standing followed ethics, but did many immoral acts and thoughts such as hypocrisy, accepting bribes, being dishonest and gambling.
Often morals influence ethics, such as in the American Constitution where many moral rights such as freedom of religion, speech, etc. are protected and made social ethics in a way it is not in other countries where it can be illegal to speak out against government officials or practice certain religions.
