Ethics is the branch of study dealing with what is the proper course of action for man. It answers the question, “What do I do?” It is the study of right and wrong in human endeavors. At a more fundamental level, it is the method by which we categorize our values and pursue them. Do we pursue our own happiness, or do we sacrifice ourselves to a greater cause? Is that foundation of ethics based on the Bible, or on the very nature of man himself, or neither?
Ethics is a requirement for human life. It is our means of deciding a course of action. Without it, our actions would be random and aimless. There would be no way to work towards a goal because there would be no way to pick between a limitless number of goals. Even with an ethical standard, we may be unable to pursue our goals with the possibility of success. To the degree which a rational ethical standard is taken, we are able to correctly organize our goals and actions to accomplish our most important values. Any flaw in our ethics will reduce our ability to be successful in our endeavors.
In online it is also important without proper ethics we might think that we would open porn website which is wrong. Proper ethic helps us to realize and think what should be do in order to value and respect our own selves. With this Ethics, we can reach our goals with the possibility of success. why? because we need the right thing we did follow what our mind thinks. ethics helps us think twice to make things right. we alweays think and think until we get the exact answer so that we can avoid the things that we must not do.
Business ethics involve the conduct of an individual doing the business. It does not have anything to do with the size of the business. If the company takes care of its responsibility towards its employees then they also will reward it with loyalty, honesty and quality. The employees also will deal ethically with the customers and business associates.
The supplier who does not exploit the advantage of seller’s market will retain the loyalty of the customers and continued business during the buyer’s market also. A person who behaves and thinks ethically will have energy and good state of mind for maximum productivity and creativity.
Teaching an employee or an adult on ethics is not very effective. Personal values and ethical behavior has to be taught by parents and in school. Ethics are important as they give us a baseline to understand the concept of right and wrong. Ethics help us to prepare ourselves to react to a situation long before that happens. Sometimes we need to react according to the situation but our built-in values play important role in our reaction to the situation and not the situation itself. So having a standard of ethics will always be better than to prefer to have situational ethics. A standard in ethics will show us how to live.
Ethics are important as they help us in dealing with people on daily basis. Right sense of thinking will make us to deal with them positively and the wrong sense will make us to contact people in negative manner. If our ethics are built on truth delivered in the word of GOD then we will treat others as children of GOD and love everyone.
Above all ethics are important as we pass them to others and show everyone the correct way of living.