Ethics is nothing else than reverence for life.
Live one day at a time emphasizing ethics rather than rules.     
Ethics is the activity of man directed to secure the inner perfection of his own personality.     
Ethics must begin at the top of an organization. It is a leadership issue and the chief executive must set the example.     
A man without ethics is a wild beast loosed upon this world.
Ethics is in origin the art of recommending to others the sacrifices required for cooperation with oneself.
Ethics are not necessarily to do with being law-abiding. I am very interested in the moral path, doing the right thing.     
Ethics is not definable, is not implementable, because it is not conscious; it involves not only our thinking, but also our feeling.     
Our very lives depend on the ethics of strangers, and most of us are always strangers to other people.
In law, a man is guilty when he violates the rights of another. In ethics he is guilty if he only thinks of doing so.     
Live one day at a time emphasizing ethics rather than rules.     
Ethics is knowing the difference between what you have a right to do and what is right to do.     
The first step in the evolution of ethics is a sense of solidarity with other human beings.
Even the most rational approach to ethics is defenseless if there isn't the will to do what is right.     
Let me give you a definition of ethics: It is good to maintain and further life it is bad to damage and destroy life.     
I can do no other than be reverent before everything that is called life. I can do no other than to have compassion for all that is called life. That is the beginning and the foundation of all ethics.
Ethical decisions ensure that everyone's best interests are protected. When in doubt, don't.
You can't put someone else in charge of your morals. Ethics is a personal discipline.     
The real task is not to rid life of ethics but to rid ethics of its ideological content.
To care for anyone else enough to make their problems one's own, is ever the beginning of one's real ethical development.     
A man is truly ethical only when he obeys the compulsion to help all life which he is able to assist, and shrinks from injuring anything that lives.
Your ethical muscle grows stronger every time you choose right over wrong.
Ethics is about how we meet the challenge of doing the right thing, when that will cost more than we want to pay.     
Ethics is not about platitudes, let alone tautologies, logic or mathematics, but about difficult choices - dilemmas.
Divorced from ethics, leadership is reduced to management and politics to mere technique.     
The needs of a society determines its ethics.
In just about every area of society, there's nothing more important than ethics.
Ethics is not a description of what people do; it's a prescription for what we all should do.     
Ethics is not about the way things are, it's about the way they ought to be.     
Relativity applies to physics, not ethics.
Action indeed is the sole medium of expression for ethics.
If ethics is not the engine of success, in the train of growth, it sure is a guard, with a flag, which may be green, or at times red.
If you are not rising with ethics, you will sink with every rise!
Ethics and equity and the principles of justice do not change with the calendar.
There is only one ethics, one set of rules of morality, one code: That of individual behavior in which the same rules apply to everyone alike.
If ethics are poor at the top, that behavior is copied down through the organization.     
In the final analysis, ethics is less about what we do, and more about who we are.     
We're given a code to live our lives by. We don't always follow it, but it's still there.
The real problem is in the hearts and minds of men. It is not a problem of physics but of ethics. It is easier to denature plutonium than to denature the evil from the spirit of man.     
Without ethics, man has no future. This is to say, mankind without them cannot be itself. Ethics determine choices and actions and suggest difficult priorities.     
Ethics are more important than laws.
Ethics is the science of duties, and it's principles, perceived by reason, and revealed to us by conscience.     
Ethics is inescapable.     
Strong ethics keep corporations healthy . Poor ethics make companies sick. Values are the immune system of every organisation.     
In any ethical situation, the thing you want least to do is probably the right action.
Ethics is a code of values which guide our choices and actions and determine the purpose and course of our lives.
Ethics and aesthetics are one.     
Character is ethics in action.
Ethics is obedience to the unenforceable.     
All ethical people strive to choose "right" over "easy" when confronted by situations that force them to choose one or the other.
Morality is the basis of things and truth is the substance of all morality.
Morality knows nothing of geographical boundaries, or distinctions of race.     
Moral courage is higher and a rarer virtue than physical courage.
Moral excellence comes about as a result of habit. We become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, brave by doing brave acts.     
Unless we discover actual truth, morality is up for grabs.
Wrong is wrong even if everyone is doing it. Right is right even if no one is doing it.     
The purpose of morality is to teach you, not to suffer and die, but to enjoy yourself and live.
Whenever you are to do a thing, though it can never be known but to yourself, ask yourself how you would act were all the world looking at you, and act accordingly.     
Morality is a burglar's tool whose merit lies in never being left behind at the scene of the crime.
Every young man would do well to remember that all successful business stands on the foundation of morality.
Do not depend upon the morality of a person until you have seen him behave while in anger.
Children often have a much stronger concept of morality than adults.
The test of morality of a society is what it does with it's children.
Morality is the thing upon which your friends smile, and immorality is the thing upon which they frown.
Morality is the herd-instinct in the individual.     
Morality is of the highest importance - but for us, not for God.     
Morality is only moral when it is voluntary.     
Do not do an immoral thing for moral reasons.
Morality, like art, means drawing a line someplace.     
The quality of moral behavior varies in inverse ratio to the number of human beings involved.
The higher the buildings, the lower the morals.The higher the buildings, the lower the morals.
Morality is simply the attitude we adopt towards people whom we personally dislike.
Morality comes with the sad wisdom of age, when the sense of curiosity has withered.      
A man that has lost moral sense is like a man in battle with both of his legs shot off: he has nothing to stand on.     
Even if everyone else is not doing good. I alone will. Even if everyone else is doing wrong, I alone will not.
Always do what is right. It will gratify half of mankind and astound the other.
There are no easy answers, but there are simple answers. We must have the courage to do what we know is morally right.
Morality is truth in full bloom.
The best way to teach morality is to make it a habit with children.
It's easy enough to preach morality on a full belly.    
Bad company ruins good morals.
We have two kinds of morality side by side: one which we preach but do not practice and another which we practice but seldom preach.      
The only immorality is not to do what one has to do when one has to do it.     
Ordinary morality is only for ordinary people.
Only morality in our actions can give beauty and dignity to life.
Do not be too moral. You may cheat yourself out of much life. So aim above morality. Be not simply good; be good for something.     
Never let your sense of morals prevent you from doing what is right!
Men are more moral than they think and far more immoral than they can imagine.
The Moral Law tells us the tune we have to play: our instincts are merely the keys.
Compassion is the basis of morality.
Morality is a private and costly luxury.
Morality is how you go about getting what you want without screwing anybody to get it.     
Morality may keep you out of jail, but it takes the blood of Jesus Christ to keep you out of hell.
Food first, then morality.
Morality, like numinous awe, is a jump; in it, man goes beyond anything that can be 'given' in the facts of experience.     
Morality begins at the point of a gun.
The hottest place in Hell is reserved for those who remain neutral in times of great moral conflict.